British Journal of Pharmacology and Toxicology 2(5): 213-226, 2011
ISSN: 2044-2467
© Maxwell Scientific Organization, 2011
Submitted: July 26, 2011 Accepted: September 25, 2011 Published: November 25, 2011
A Review of Some Basic Parasite Diseases in Culture Fisheries Flagellids,
Dinoflagellides and Ichthyophthriasis, Ichtyobodiasis, Coccidiosis Trichodiniasis,
Heminthiasis, Hirudinea Infestation, Crustacean Parsite and Ciliates
J.F.N. Abowei, O.F. Briyai and S.E. Bassey
Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Niger Delta University,
Wilberforce Island, Bayelsa State, Nigeria
Abstract: A review some basic parasite diseases in fish: flagellids, dinoflagellides and ichthyophthriasis in
African fish was carried out to educate fish culturist and the private sector on some challenges faced in culture
fisheries. Some common parasite diseases: Ichtyobodiasis, Coccidiosis, Ichtyopthiariasis, Trichodiniasis,
Heminthiasis, Crustacean parasite, Hirudinea infestation, Flagellates and Ciliates, Taxonomy and diagnosis,
Life cycle and biology, Epizootiology, pathology, control, Infections with parasite dinoflagellids and
Ichthyophthiriasis are some parasite infections in fish discussed.
Key words: African fish, biology, causative agents, epizootiology, life cycle, pathology and control, some
parasite infections, taxonomy and diagnosis
INTRODUCTION in a number of water systems in tropical Africa (Lake
Volta and East African lake systems - Fryer, 1961;
Parasite infection in fish refers to a diseased Paperna, 1968; Paperna and Thurston, 1968; Fryer and
condition in fish resulting from organism living in or on Iles, 1972), but taxonomic data are limited to only a few
thre fish (Bassey, 2011). The relationship between the fish locations (Kazubski and El-Tantawy, 1986; El-Tantawy
and parasite is referred to parasitism. In this relationship, and Kazubski, 1986). Southern Africa and the Zambezi
one benefits while the other suffers. The host suffers and river system. Data are also available from Israeli fish
the parasite benefits. Various types of host exist. The
(Basson et al., 1983; Basson and Van, 1987; Van and
parasite reaches its adulthood in or on the definitive or
Basson, 1989, 1992).
final host. Secondary (intermediate) host harbors parasite
Integumental ectoprotozoan genera are readily
but hinders its development until it passes to a definitive
differentiated (Kabata, 1985), while diagnosis of species
host. A temporary host harbors the parasite briefly.
is difficult and often requires special staining. Most
Parasites from temporary host become independent
ectoparasitic forms are readily detected in direct
soonest. Reservoir host serves as a source of parasite for
microscopic examination of skin and gill scrapings from
other host. Protozoan and Metazoans are examples of fish
live (or freshly killed) fish. Flagellates may be further
parasites. Protozoan is a unicellular organism while
detected in air dried, methanol fixed, Giemsa stained
metazoans are multicelluar organisms (Bassey, 2011).
smears. Smears containing ciliates should be air dried,
The ubiquitous ectoprotozoans are cosmopolitan or
trans-continentally dispersed via translocation of their fixed in Bouin for 20 min., destained in 70% ethanols,
cultured fish hosts (carp and tilapia in particular) brought to water, stained in a haematoxylin stain and
(Ichthyobodo necator, Cryptobia branchialis, Chilodonella mounted after dehydration. Trichodinids for specific
hexasticha,C.piscicola, Trichodina acuta, T. heterodentata differentiation should be impregnated with silver. Air
and T. pediculus, Trichodinella epizootica, - Hoffman, dried smears should be placed in 2% silver nitrate for 7-9
1978; Basson et al., 1983; Van and Basson, 1987, 1989; min. in the dark, rinsed in water and exposed to the sun or
Natividad et al., 1986; Shaharom-Harrison and Abdullah, UV for 5-10 min.
1988; Abaladejo and Arthur, 1989; Bondad-Reantaso and
Arthur, 1989; Basson and Van, 1993). Some common parasite diseases: Ichtyobodiasis,
Distribution of the more specialised host-specific Coccidiosis, Ichtyopthiariasis, Trichodiniasis,
species follows that of their hosts, but may also be more Heminthiasis, Crustacean parasite, Hirudinea infestation,
restricted, sometimes to only one or a few watersheds. Flagellates and Ciliates, Taxonomy and diagnosis, Life
There is evidence for the presence of Ichthyobodo, cycle and biology, Epizootiology, pathology, control,
Chilodonella, and in particular trichodinids and sessilians Infections with parasite dinoflagellids and
Corresponding Author: J.F.N. Abowei, Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Niger Delta University, Wilberforce
Island, Bayelsa State, Nigeria
213

Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2(5): 213-226, 2011
Ichthyophthiriasis x are are reviewed to educate fish the identification of the protozoan parasites on the skin
farmers and the public sector to challenges faced in scrapings and gill arches mounted on glass slides, viewed
culture fisheries. under the microscope. Most protozoacide disinfectants
can eliminate trichodina, but prevention with maintenance
COCCIDIOSIS of good water quality, avoiding overcrowding and good
hygienic practices is best.
This refers to infestation of the coccid organisms.
Emeria and Haplozoon species. The sporocyst and cocyst Heminthiasis: This is an infection due to parasite worms;
stages are the only stages outside the host. Emeria species Examples of such worms are Trematoda (Monogenea and
infest the intestinal mucosa and epithelium, causing white digenea), Cestodes and Nematodes. The latter requires
blisters in the intestinal wall and enlarged intestine. intermediate hosts; hence the life cycle is complex.
Haplozoon species on the other hand is a blood borne Monogenea trematodes include the families,
parasite infesting the blood cells. Dactylogyridae and Gyrodactylidae. These worms are
The presence of oocyst in faecal caste and intestinal found on the skin or gills of lower aquatic vertebrates.
smear are diagnosis of the disease. Observation of blood Only a few of these worms are viviparous. All others are
smear under the microscope can reveal haplosan oocyst in oviparous. The specially adapted structures haptor and
the erythrocytes and leucocytes. Severity of the condition opishaptor aid their attachment to the host. Hooks and
depends on the load of the infective organisms in the suckers are responsible for the damage on the host. These
infected organs, and the extents of damage. Cases of create portals of entry for opportunistic pathogens. This
active coccidiosis are rare but severe condition can be can occur only in heavy infestation. Extensive damage
controlled with the coccidiositamprol and furapol used for can be done to gills in dactylogyrus infestation. The
higher vertebrate. damage on the gill can cause fish to gasp. Gyrodactytus
infestation results in the development of whitish or
Ichtyopthiariasis: Another name for this disease is white grayish spots on the skin of infected host.
spot disease or “ich”. The disease is common with cold Observation of trematodal worms on skin scraping on
and warm water fish species. The causative agent, gill tissue under the microscope is good aid in diagnosis.
Ichtyophthinus multifilis is the largest protozoan parasite Some species of monogenea trematodes can be observed
found on fish. Matured trophozoites are oval to round in without magnification, because of their size.
shape and 0.5 to 1.0 mm at the longest axis. The Formalin and potassium permanganate are good
trophozoite dislodges from host’s body as a trophont disinfectant in controlling the monogena trematodes.
uniformly ciliated with macro and micronucleus. The Chemotherapy in the control of the infestation without
trophont produces 250 -1000 tomites (Infective host) good health management cannot be effective. Fry,
within itself. The tromites then invade the skin and the fingerlings and adult fish can be treated with formalin at
gills of a fish host forming white spots. a dose of 25-50 ppm applied to pond. The concentration
Heavy infestation results in restlessness, emaciation, level of 0.12 ppm Bromex R or 0.25 ppm, DipterexR
body irritation and gasping. Morbidity can be up to 100%, (Dylox Rmasotea R) is, suitable for pond treatment. Pond
while mortality only occurs with extensive damage to the banks can also be disinfected with quicklime or calcium
gills and the skin. Presence of white spots on the skin, cyanamide. Catfish is also an intermediate host for
gills and identification of the protozoan parasite in the Trematodian matecercariae. They are particularly present
scraping of the white spot observed under the microscope in high number in the connective tissue around the brain
confirms the condition. and muscular tissues.
Most protozoacide disinfectants can destroy tomites
and other non intra-dermal stages, but cannot affect the Hirudinea infestation: Blood sucking leeches can be
intra dermal stages, because disinfectants cannot penetrate present in fresh water ponds. Leeches are referred to as
the white spot. However, a temperature of 32ºC can predacious parasite, capable of surviving at 20ºC. This
weaken or kill the intra dermal stages. All other control explains why they constitute problem for warm water
methods such as quarantine, maintenance of hygienic fishes. Leeches suck host’s blood, reducing their vitality
environment and good water quality are also important. by rendering them anemic. They damage host’s skin and
are creating portals of entry for opportunistic pathogens.
Trichodiniasis: This is trichodina infection. The etiologic They are known to transmit the protozoan parasite,
agent is trichodina species, a uniformly ciliated saucer Trypanozon and Trypanosomes. Leeches are easily
shaped protozoan parasite. The organisms infect the skin, recognized when attached to the skin or fins. In heavy
gills and cause irritation on the tissues. The disease infestations the attachment areas are hyperemic and
manifests in the form of restlessness, loss of appetite and hemorrhagic leeches collected from fish can be
gasping (Dyspnoea) in heavy infestation of the gills. The anaesthetized by adding menthol crystal to the water in
condition can be diagnosed based on the clinical signs and the dish where the leeches are kept to ensure complete
214

Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2(5): 213-226, 2011
FLAGELLATES AND CILIATES
Host specific species are associated with a wide range
of fish species from most families. Ubiquitous or
opportunistic species (Ichthyobodo necator, Chilodonella
spp., and some species of Trichodina, Ambyphrya and
Scopulata (Scyphidia) are particularly common in juvenile
cichlids and carp.
Figure I shows Ectoparasites and intestinal Protozoa:
A. Ichthyobodo necator free (left) and attached (10-15 :m
long axis). B. Ichthyobodo sp. from Aplocheilichthy
Cryptobia (length 6-8 :m).D.Hexamita sp. from tilapia
hybrid gut (7-12 :m). E. Thecamoeba (40 :m diam.)
F.Entameoba(15:m diam.).G.Life cycle of
Ichthyophthirius multifiliis:1. Trophont; 2. Dividing
tomont; 3. End of division - tomites (theronts) escape
from the cyst residues; 4. Tomite (theront).
H.Protoopalina (150-350 :m long).
Plate 1 shows Ectoparasite Protozoa: a. Ichthynecator
on gill arch of Oreochromis aureus, Israel. b. l. necator
mouth lining of wild goldfish, Israel. c-e. Cryptinfections,
Israc, on farmed goldfish;d.on Hypophthalmichthys
molitrix (silver carp) gill rackers. f-m. Chilodonellosis:
Fig. 1: Ectoparasites and intestinal protozoa
O. aureus, Israel; g. live Chilodonella hexasticha,
O. mossambicus, S. Africa; h. C. hexasticha, silver
relaxation before fixation in 95% alcohol. Heavy impregnated, O. mossambicus, S. Africa; i.C. ( = cyprini
infestation of leeches causes anemia and secondary O. mossambicus, S. Africa (h,i. by courtesy of L.
bacteria infection of the ulcer on the fish skin. The Bassok–m. Gill damage in O. aureusxniloticus, Israel: k,l,
application of 5 ppm cupric chloride (CuCl) and 25 ppt abrasion and desquamation (arrows- proliferating chloride
2
sodium chloride (NaCl) for 1 h can be effective in the cells) and m, epithelial hyperplasia.
treatment of hirudinea infestation.
Plate 2 continued ectoparasite protozoa: a. Scanning
electron microscopic view of severe gill chilodonellosis
Crustacean parasite: These include several species of
in O. aureus x niloticus Israel. b. Ambyphrya sp. from
copepods, branchiurans isopods, amphipods and
O. mossambicus S. Africa (haematoxylin stained). c. same
barnacles. Lernae sp. and Argulus sp. (fish lice) are
Ambyphrya sp. live. d. Apiosoma sp. live ex
copepods and branchiura respectively. Both crustaceans
O.mossambicus. e. Stalked Apiosoma sp.O. mossambicus.
are oviparous, laying eggs, which develop into nauplic,
f. Scanning electron microscopic view of Scopulata sp.
metanauplic and young crustacean. Subsequent molting O. aureus x niloticus fry, Israel. g. Scopulata constricta
results to adulthood. The first copepod stage infests the from O. mossambicus, S. Africa (haematoxylin stained)
skin and gills and damages the tissues of these organs. (courtesy of L. Basson). h. Enlarged view of live, stalked
Light infestation can cause much harm to fish host. Apiosoma, O. mossambicus, S. Africa. i. Scopulata sp.
Hosts rub their bodies against the sides of the holding live, from O. mossambicus, S. Africa. k. Apiosoma
facilities to dislodge the irritating parasites. The skin, fin piscicola from carp skin (haematoxylin stained).
or gill secrets excess mucus. Erythematous or
Plate 3 shows Ectoparasitic Protozoa: Trichodinids: a,b.
hemorrhagic lesions occur on infected parts of fish body.
Trichodina heterodentata: a, live, carp, Israel; silver
An area of attachment of the parasite becomes swollen.
impregnated, O. aureus x niloticus, Israel. c. Scanning
Benzene hexachloride (Lindans (R) and Masoten
electron microscopic (SEM) view of T. reticulata of
(Dylox(R) can be applied indefinitely at 0.12 and 0.25
goldfish. d,e. SEM view of O. aureus x niloticus gill
mg/L for the control of these parasites. the parasites.
infection with Tripartiella cichlidarum; f. same as d, in
Identification of the organisms seems not difficult
histology.
because they can be seen with the naked eye. This can be
based on the morphology of the adult female Lernae Plate 4 continued Ectoparasitic Protozoa: trichodinids:
species and any adult Argulus sp. Silver impregnated trichodinids: a. Trichodina compacta
215

Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2(5): 213-226, 2011
Plate 1: Ectoparasite protozoa Plate 2: Continued ectoparasite protozoa
Plate 3: Ectoparasite protozoa. Trichodinid Plate 4: Ectoparasite trichodinid
216

Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2(5): 213-226, 2011
(prev. acuta), O. mossambicus, S. Africa. b. T. migala genera) - cilia lacking, variable numbers of tentacles arise
(prev. pediculus), O. mossambicus, S. Africa. c. from the rounded body.
T. mutabilis, Barbus paludinosus, S. Africa. d.
T. centrostrigata O. mossambicus, S. Africa. e. Life cycle and biology: Most ectoprotozoans, flagellates
T. reticulata, farmed goldfish, Israel. f. T. minuta, as well as ciliates have simple life histories. Species of
O. mossambicus, S. Africa. g. Trichodinella epizootica, Cryptobia are ectoparasites as well as intestinal and
Carp, S. Africa. h. Tripartiella cichlidarum, O. aurea, vascular parasites. It has been shown that an ectoparasitic
Israel. i. Hemitrichodina robusta Marcusenius phase occurs in two vascular species (Woo, 1987). Both
macrolepidotus (by courtesy of L. Basson). Flagellates ectoparasitic flagellates, I. necator and Cryptobia spp.,
[Mastigophora, Kinetoplastida]: occur either free swimming or attached to the integument,
the former through a cytoplasmic protrusion (Schubert,
Cryptobia: Free, spindle shaped, 10-30×3-5 :m in size 1968) and the latter by attachment with the flagellum
(C. branchialis), or pyriform when attached to the (Lom, 1980). Reproduction is usually by binary fission.
integument, with two flagellae, one wholly or partly Conjugation is sometimes observed in ciliates. Sessile
adjunct to the body, kinetoplast rod-shaped or round. species also bud and give birth to a free swimming mobile
generation, reminiscent of mobile peritrichs, which settle
Ichthyobodo: Free, 13-26×2-7 :m in size, or attached to on suitable substrates (fish). The sessile suctorians
the integument; with four flagellae. reproduce by internal and external budding, the detached
buds are ciliated. As the buds become attached to a new
Ciliates [Ciliophora]: Chilodonella rounded to oval, location on the piscine integument, cilia are shed and
cytostome distinct, macronucleus round and cilia on the tentacles appear (Hoffman, 1978). Spores or other forms
concave ventral surface are arranged in several concave of waiting stages are unknown; the suggested existence of
parallel rows: waiting stages, such as encysted forms of Chilodonella
hexasticha in the gills (Rowland et al., 1991) or free cysts
C. hexastichasize: 30-65×20-50 :m, with 6-8 ciliary lines (Bauer et al., 1969), has to be confirmed.
on each side. Water temperatures do not seem to be an important
parameter, in spite of reports of low temperatures being
C. piscicola (syn: C. cyprini): size 33-100×24-60 :m, more optimal for reproduction of Chilodonella piscicola
with more than 10 ciliary lines on each side. and some trichodinids (Bauer et al., 1969). Massive
infections with I. necator, both species of Chilodonella
Trichodinacup: shaped, 20-100 :m in diameter and the ubiquitous trichodinids and sessile species, occur
withconcentric rows of cilia and a crown of denticles. The in low (12-17ºC) and high (25-30ºC) ambient
denticle shape is a distinct taxonomic feature; for temperatures in southern Africa and Israel. Most
differential specific diagnosis of African spp. (Basson freshwater ectoparasitic protozoans disappear in ponds
et al., 1983; Basson and Van, 1987; Van and Basson, with increased salinities (above 2000 ppm chlorinity),
1989, 1992). only I. necator and some Cryptobia are tolerant and
become the predominant parasites in fish of such ponds.
Small trichodinids, predominantly from the gills, are There are also halophilic species of Ambyphrya and
bell shaped (Tripartiella and Paratrichodina) and often Scyphidia which infect fish (grey mullet) in estuaries.
settle on the tips of the gill lamellae (Basson and Van, A number of ciliates (species of Tetrahymena,
1989, for generic division of Trichodinidae). In Ophryoglena, Glaucoma, Colpidium and others
Trichodinella, the ray (the inner extension of the denticle) (Hoffman, 1978) are facultative parasites, or opportunists
(Van and Basson, 1989), is totally reduced, and in the which will colonise fish in special circumstances, most
other two genera is delicate or rudimentary (Kazubski and often when fish are stressed or traumatised (Hoffman,
El-Tantawy, 1986; Basson and Van, 1987). 1978). All others mentioned above are obligatory
Genera of sessile peritrichs are differentiated by their parasites which will apparently survive for only a limited
macronuclei and scopula (attachment leg) (Viljoen and time outside their hosts. Non-parasitic sessile peritrichs
Van, 1983, 1985): Scopulata (Scyphidia) round are different species from those colonising living
macronucleus and wide scopula; organisms. Trichodinids and sessile species found on
Apiosoma (Glossatella) pyriform nucleus, small aquatic invertebrates comprise different species from
scopula; Ambyphrya Ribbon shaped macronucleus and those infecting fish (Van and Basson, 1987; Viljoen and
wide scopula. Stalked sessile peritrichs - Heteropolaria Van, 1983, 1985). There are, however, a few documented
with elongate body and curled macronucleus (Foissner exceptions: T. pediculus being reported from both hydra
et al., 1985); Epistilis cup-shaped with horseshoe-shaped and fish, and T. diaptomi a parasite of a calanoid copepod,
macronucleus (Viljoen and Van, 1983). Some Apiosoma which temporarily invaded hatchery grown fry of Clarias
also develop on stalks. Suctoria: (Trichophyra and other gariepinus (Basson et al., 1983; Basson and Van, 1991).
217

Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2(5): 213-226, 2011
There are several degrees of adaptation of are a number of reports on poor condition and mortalities,
trichodinids to their piscine hosts: ubiquitous species, of particularly of fry, coinciding with massive infestation of
an opportunistic nature, which are always found on the trichodinids, Trichodinella epizootica in particular (Lom,
fish skin but never on the gills (T. pediculus and T. acuta); 1973), and the sessilians Apiosoma, Ambyphrya and
other ubiquitous species occur both on gills and skin Scopulata (Fijan, 1961; Meyer, 1970; Paperna,
(T. heterodentata); additional, seemingly ubiquitous, 1984b,1980) Lightner et al., 1988), histopathological
widespread species appear to have a variable degree of changes in events of massive infections by these
predilection for one fish family or another (cichlids or ectoprotozoans are hardly evident, if occurring at all
cyprinids). Among the latter, trichodinids with seemingly (Fitzgerald et al., 1982; Paperna, 1985). Trichodinella
related morphological characteristics (e.g., pediculus-like, epizootica in carp (Lom, 1973) and Tripartiella
acuta-like and nigra-like), in different geographical cichlidarum in Paperna (1980) cichlids cause some
regions, demonstrate definite affinities to a particular erosion of the gill epithelium. However, food vacuoles of
group of hosts and may in fact comprise diverse species trichodinids revealed bacteria rather than sloughed cells.
(Van and Basson, 1989). Host specific trichodinids, are Ultrastructural observation on attached Apiosoma did
all, with only a few exceptions, gill parasites: not reveal any interference with the host cell serving as
T. centrostrigata and great numbers of small trichodinids substrate (Lom and Corliss, 1968; Lom, 1973; Fitzgerald
mainly species of Tripartiella, are associated with et al., 1982) or peripheral tissue response. Thus,
Cichlidae; T. reticulata occurs mainly in goldfish,
mortalities following massive colonisation of gills by
T. kazubski has been found in South African Barbus spp.
sessilians (Fijan, 1961) could result from the dense cover
and T. nobilis and T. kupermani mainly in asian carp
of sessilians disrupting gas exchange through the
(Basson et al., 1983; Van and Basson, 1987, 1989;
respiratory epithelium. The only exception among these
Abaladejo and Arthur, 1989).
infections are the colonies of the stalked sessilia
Pathology: Ectoparasitic protozoa are variable in their Heteropolaria (Epistilis) which cause lesions (“red sore”)
effect on their hosts. Pathological effects are density at the stalk attachment to the fish skin, these inflamed
dependent, when both the size of the parasite population haemorrhagic lesions are also contaminated with the
and the nature of the tissue responses are modulated by bacterium Aeromonas hydrophila (Esch et al., 1976;
the physiological (clinical) condition of the fish. Hostile Miller and Chapman, 1976). Reported localised infection
environments (stressful conditions) compromise the above the opercular bone (in cultured tilapia in Israel)
fishes' capacity to counteract infection.
resulted in aggravation of the lesion into a wide (6 mm in
Ichthyobodo necator attaches itself to epithelial cells
diam.) perforation of the bone. Suctorians (Trichophyra
and through an inserted protrusion consumes their
spp.) in certain instances cause cytological damage to the
contents (Schubert, 1968), whereas Chilodonella spp.
gill lamellae cells in direct contact with the parasites and
browse the epithelial surface (Paperna and Van, 1983).
subsequent hyperplasia and haemorrhages of the gill
Histopathological changes in the integument following
infection by Chilodonella spp. and I. necator are an tissue (Heckmann and Carroll, 1985).
outcome of two counteracting cellular processes -
hyperplasia of the epithelial cells, including mucus cells Epizootiology: The course of infection by ectoparasitic
and chloride cells, versus a progressive cellular protozoans is determined either individually or by the
destruction. Cellular destruction primarily occurs due to interaction of the following factors:
direct action of the parasites, and later by enhanced
abrasion of the peripheral cells after the depletion of • Mobility of the fish
mucus forming cells. The production of mucus cells is
• The fish's capacity to activate its defence systems
limited. Accelerated mucus cell production stimulated by
• Reduced mobility facilitates parasite colonisation as
the infection apparently exhausts resources for mucus
well as moderating loss through detachment
production, and the infected fish become “dry”. Some
• Drift from the integumental surface
parasites seem to yield cytotoxins or proteolytic enzymes
which could be the cause of spongiosis, which affects
both the proliferated and unchanged epithelial layer Defence mechanisms other than epithelial
(Robertson et al., 1981; Paperna and Van, 1983). hyperplasia, and specific immune responses to
Secondary cellular damage due to degeneration, necrosis integumental ectoparasites have not yet been studied
and desquamation results in the degradation and except in I. multifiliis, although spontaneous recovery
disintegration of the epithelial layer. from infection has been frequently observed. Juvenile fish
Cryptobia attachment through the flagellum does not and fish under stress and at below optimum ambient
induce any pathological or even ultrastructural cellular
temperature have both limited mobility and apparently
damage (Lom, 1980), contrary to reports of morbidities
immunological incompatibility, being either naive or
associated with this parasite (Woo, 1987). Although there
immunosuppressed (Sniezko, 1964; Avtalion, 1981).
218

Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2(5): 213-226, 2011
Heavy infections by ectoparasitic protozoans are mainly In small ponds (1 hectare) fish are not spared even in
found in young fish (less than one year old) when relatively mild winters, with minimum temperatures
overcrowded and confined to restricted habitats, and above 13ºC. Fish in lakes and large reservoirs on the other
under stress conditions. In these circumstances hand, become severely affected only in extremely cold
winters, with temperatures declining to 10ºC and below.
opportunistic and ubiquitous species are involved.
Mortalities often occur from the cumulative effects of
Infections otherwise, in grown-up fish, are very low and
ectoprotozoans, dermal saprolegniases and systemic
host-specific species predominate.
bacterial diseases, all mediated by the stress of low
Cichlids fry, as soon as they were weaned from
temperature. In addition to temperature stress,
parental care, and sometimes before, became heavily
overwintering tilapia in ponds are often stressed by
infected by trichodinids and sessilians of the genera
overcrowded stocking and inadequate feeding.
Ambyphrya and Scopulata. Infestation reached its climax
Intermittence of higher and lower ambient temperatures,
level in fish 10-12 mm long. Such infections occur in
characteristic of the Mediterranean type winters, increases
natural habitats (lakes), man-made impoundments, as well
the unpredictability of food demand by fish and thus
as in hatchery installations (Fryer, 1961; Paperna, 1984c).
complicates feeding schedules.
Heavy infections, however, were not found in all the
Infestation levels rise by late fall, with increased
breeding habitats of the investigated lake system.
abundance of trichodinids and C. hexasticha. Fish
Conditions for infestation varied with habitat and ambient
succumbing in early winter were predominantly
conditions and were positively related to the abundance of
hyperinfected by C. hexasticha. Late winter and early
fry schools.
spring mass mortalities (even when temperatures were
Level of infection in the fry sharply declined as fish
already rising above 15ºC) were associated with
gained in size. The decline in infection also coincided
C. piscicola hyperinfections. C. piscicola is abundant in
with changes in parasite species composition, the
carp in some ponds already by early winter; however, it
ubiquitous, generalists and opportunists: T. pediculus
will only infect tilapia at the end of the cold season when
T.migala, T. acuta, T. compacta, T. heterodentata, and
they become compromised by prolonged stress.
species of Ambyphrya and Scopularia being gradually
Ichthyobodo necator hyperinfections are morbid to
replaced by species specific to cichlids: Tripartiella spp.
cichlids as well as to fish of other families. Mortalities
Trichodina centrostrigata and species of Apiosoma
occur in fish overcrowded in holding tanks, ponds and in
(Basson et al., 1983; Kazubski and El-Tantawy, 1986; El-
both warm and cold water conditions. Natural infection
Tantawy and Kazubski, 1986; Basson and Van, 1987;
was also revealed in Aplocheilichthys gambiae from a
Van and Basson, 1989).
pool in Ghana. In Israel Cryptobia spp. occasionally
Heavy infections with ubiquitous trichodinids
swarm the gills of tilapia, goldfish and silver carp and
(T.pediculus) and sessile peritrichs (mainly Scopulata
also, in the latter, in low saline waters (8-10 ppt salt) but
spp.) also occur in carp fry in hatcheries and nursery
data from Africa are lacking.
ponds, and likewise as fish grow, are replaced by more
O. mossambicus appears to be more tolerant to low
specialised species such as T. nigra, T. mutabilis and
temperatures in water of higher salinities, and also where
Apiosoma spp. (Basson et al., 1983; Shaharom-Harrison
most ectoparasites are excluded except l. necator.
and Abdullah, 1988; Abaladejo and Arthur, 1989). Heavy
Members of the genus Tilapia, in Israel (T. zillii) and in
infections (by trichodinids and sessile species) accumulate
southern Africa (T. rendalli and T. sparmanii) are also
in fish - small spp. of Barbus, Alestes, cyprinodontids and
less affected in freshwaters by low temperatures and are
juvenile cichlids and Clarias spp. crowded into residual
rarely heavily parasitised.
pools in rivers drying-out during the dry season. In larger
Few instances of mortalities coincided with heavy
water bodies in Africa, infections with both trichodines
infections, concomitantly or exclusively, by trichodinids,
and sessilians in fish other than fry may be common but
sessilians (Apiosoma), Chilodonella spp. and I. necator,
low (Paperna, 1968; Viljoen and Van, 1985; Kazubski,
in overwintering carp, but occurred more often in relation
1986). Low temperature stress plays an important role in
to other stress factors such as high levels of overcrowding
epizootic outbreaks of ectoprotozoan infections in cichlid
or high nitrite concentrations (Fijan, 1961; Sarig, 1971).
fish outside the limits of the tropical environment and of
Heavy infections by Chilodonella spp. seems to have an
populations introduced to non-tropical countries such as
excluding effect on other integumental protozoans.
the southern USA. Otherwise, skin and gill ectoparasites coexist, and are
Heavy infections by skin and gill protozoa, even synergistic, with metazoan ectoparasites
predominantly of Chilodonella spp., are a frequent (Gyrodactylus and Argulus) and skin lesions
occurrence in overwintering stocks of cultured tilapia (epithelioma), (Paperna and Kohn, 1964; Sarig, 1971;
hybrids (Oreochromis aureus x niloticus) in Israel, and Paperna, 1985). Mass mortalities of farmed Clarias
O.mossambicus in ponds and dam reservoirs in southern gariepinus (in the Central African Republic) were
Africa (Du Plessis, 1952; Oldewage and Van, 1987; associated with mass infestation by Chilodonella
Paperna, and Van1983; Paperna, 1984b). hexasticha. Epistilis infections, including red sore and
219

Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2(5): 213-226, 2011
opercular perforations only occur sporadically with no
particular link to overwintering.
Control: Treatment with formalin is still the only
effective means to control massive ectoparasitic infections
in all warm water cultured fish species. In Israeli fish
farms, ponds are sprayed with formalin up to
concentrations of 25 or 40 ppm (of the 37% commercial
product) (Sarig, 1971; Lahav and Sarig, 1972). Efficacy
of formalin treatments is affected by ambient
temperatures, water quality, including salinities and
parasites treated. Product quality is variable, and is
particularly affected by storage, resulting in accumulation
of polymerised (paraformaldehyde) sediment.
Trichodinids were readily eradicated with treatment by 25
ppm, while elimination of Chilodonella was achieved
after treatment with 40-50 ppm. Van et al. (1984) also
demonstrated differential efficacy with the type of fish
treated, e.g., 25 ppm per 24 h was effective in cleaning
infected carp, while with tilapia fry it has been achieved
with 45 ppm per 24 h.
Plate 5: Dinoflagellids and ichthyophthiriasis
DINOFLAGELLIDS AND
ICHTHYOPHTHIRIASIS INFECTIONS Plate 5 shows Dinoflagellids and Ichthyophthyriasis:
a. Piscinoodinium sp. on Colisa lisa fry (Photo
Parasite dinoflagellids: Parasitic dinoflagellids,the A.Diamant). b. Enlarged view of a. c. Amyloodinium
marine Amyloodinium ocellatum and the freshwater ocellatum on farmed Sparus aurata fry, Red Sea. d.
Piscinoodinium pillulare and P. limneticum, are not Trichophyra sp. (Suctoria) from Morone saxatilis, USA.
discriminatory in their choice of piscine hosts and have e-i. Ichthyophthirius multifiliis: e, live trophont, carp,
been implicated in mass mortalities of tropical marine and Israel (by courtesy of S. Sarig); f, benign infection on eel's
freshwater aquarium fish (Jacobs, 1946; Paperna, 1980). (Anguilla anguilla) skin, live; g, Silver impregnated,
A. ocellatum has infected sea water acclimatised Oreochromis mossambicus, SA; h, histology of same
Oreochromis mossambicus and Aphanius dispar in inland infection as f; i, benign infection carp.
salt pans; some strains of this parasite survive in salinities
as low as 10 ppt. P. pillulare infection in 14 species of Life cycle and biology: The life cycle of the dinoflagellid
tropical ornamental freshwater fish of diverse families as fish parasite is comprised of a parasitic feeding stage
well as in carp and crucian carp. Epizootic infections and (trophont) which attaches to integumentary epithelial
mortalities were recently reported in farmed cyprinid fish cells, and an encysted dividing stage (tomont) which is
in Malaysia, including grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon detached from the host. The trophonts of P. pillulare
idella), bighead (Aristichthys nobilis), Leptobarbus derive an essential part of their nutrition from
hoevenii and Puntius gonionotus (Shaharom-Harrison et photosynthesis. Trophonts dislodged at any time during
al., 1990). The presence of P. pillulare has never been their trophic stage will transform into a dividing tomont.
established in Africa, but this ubiquitous parasite may Divisions yield a motile infective stage (dinospore) which
eventually be found. If introduced with culture seed, it is attaches to a new host. There are several detailed studies
likely to become established. of A. ocellatum (Paperna, 1984a), but comparable detailed
data on the freshwater fish dinoflagellids are lacking. Data
Diagnosis: Trophonts, when reaching the final stage of on P. limneticum growth and division (Jacobs, 1946),
growth, are visible to the naked eye (80-100 :m diameter) suggests that parasites reach a “maturation” prior to
as white spots (similar to that seen in ichthyophthiriasis) detachment. P. pillulare trophonts on the gills, at 23-25ºC,
and turn dark blue when exposed to Lugol's-iodine. They develop from dinospore to detached tomont in three to
are oval with a smooth wall and with inner aggregates of four days. The tomont then completes division to the
globules. In Malaysian fish, clinical signs of P. pillulare dinospore stage within 50-70 h. At 15-17ºC, the process
infection comprise both a rust-coloured appearance of the of division is lengthened to 11 days.
skin, indicating the presence of the parasite trophonts (20-
75×14-50 :m), and a dense covering of mucus Pathology and epizootiology: In larval fish, infections
(Shaharom-Harrison et al., 1990). were limited to the skin, whereas in large fish the highest
220

Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2(5): 213-226, 2011
parasite densities occurred on the gill filaments and in the
buccal-pharyngeal integument. Fish recovering from the
epizootic infestation through a gradual decrease in
infection, could not be reinfected (Paperna, 1980). A.
ocellatum is attached to and feeds from the host epithelial
cell by means of rhizoids, which penetrate the host cell.
The consumed cell gradually degenerates and collapses.
Damage to infected cells leads to focal erosion of the
epithelium. Prolonged infection exhausts a generation of
mucus cells and leads to accelerated desquamation.
Proliferation of the epithelium causes obliteration of the
gill lamellae, while the inner strata of the epithelium
become spongious and in some cases undergo complete
lysis (Paperna, 1980).
Attachment and penetration organelles of P. pillulare
differ from those seen in A. ocellatum, in that the host cell
is penetrated by nail-like extensions. However, damage to
the host cell is similar (Lom and Schubert, 1983).
Significant histopathological changes are only seen in the
gills, where most of the infection occurs, namely a
massive proliferation of the branchial epithelium which
causes fusion of the lamellae by a confluent cellular mass Plate 6: Ichthyophthiriasis
(Shaharom-Harrison et al., 1990). Piscinoodinium
infection in Malaysia initially occurred among ornamental parasites. Data available from Africa are limited to
fish, but it spread eventually to pond farmed local and Southern Africa (in cichlids, carp, Barbus spp., trout and
exotic cyprinids, causing mortality in fry of Puntius eels - Du Plessis, 1952; Lombard, 1968; Van et al., 1984)
and Uganda (on native Barbus amphigramma and exotic
gonionotus in particular, although clinical signs were also
Lebistes reticulatus from small streams at Paperna 1972).
apparent in a wider range of cyprinid fish species
It is very common in Israel, in both farmed (Sarig, 1971;
(Shaharom-Harrison et al., 1990).
Hines and Spira, 1973a) and wild fish including cichlids
(Ventura and Paperna, 1985).
Control: A. ocellatum is controlled by continuous
application of copper sulphate, 0.75 ppm into infected
Diagnosis: Gross signs - white spots on the skin and the
tanks. A further option is a mixture of 5-hydrate copper
gills, which under microscopic examination reveal (in
sulphate with citric acid monohydrate, to yield 0.15 ppm
skin and gill scrapings) uniformly ciliated organisms with
copper ion concentration in the water (Kabata, 1985). The
a small cytostome, which may reach up to 1 mm in
same methodology will apparently effectively control
diameter. Staining with either haematoxylins or Giemsa
Piscinoodinium infection, although concentrations should
(after adequate fixation, in such as Bouin) reveals a large
be adjusted to the freshwater medium and the fish targeted
crescent-shaped macronucleus and small micronucleus.
for treatment. In freshwater with a pH below 7.0 (in
Ichthyophthirius multifiliis is a monotypic genus of
tropical aquaculture), concentrations above 0.3 ppm may
hymenostomatid ciliates.
be lethal to fish (e.g. Puntius gonionotus fry).
Plate 6 shows a continuation of Ichthyophthiriasis: a.
ICHTHYOPHTHIRIASIS
heavily infected Barbus amphigramma, from Uganda; b.
Early invasion of the pharyngeal mucosa of young eel,
Most species of freshwater fish are susceptible,
experimental. c. Heavy infection in skin of Clarias lazera
although some may be more so than others. The world
fry, Israel; d, Gill infection of Oreochromis mossambicus,
wide distribution of I. multifiliis (Hoffman, 1978) has
Transvaal, South Africa. e. Parasites displacing gill
apparently been facilitated by the widespread
lamellae of carp, Transvaal, South Africa. f. Cytolysis in
translocation of cultured and ornamental fish. The gill infection of Haplochromis flavii-josephi, Lake
presence of this parasite in autochthonous fish, in remote Kinneret, Israel. g. Infection resulting in proliferation of
areas of the world including, southern Venezuela the gill epithelium of Apistogramma sp. from South
(Ventura and Paperna, 1985) and Northern Transvaal in Venezuela.
South Africa (Paperna, 1985) may suggest, however, that
many populations, particularly those in the tropics, are Life history and biology: Trophonts (feeding stages)
comprised of a mix of autochthonous and introduced develop within the integumentary epithelium, always
221

Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2(5): 213-226, 2011
above the basal membrane (Ventura and Paperna, 1985; and Spira (1973b, 1974a,b) haematological and clinical
Ewing and Kocan, 1992). By maturity, which is reached data from heavily infected fish reveal evident
in 2 days at ambient temperatures of 25-28ºC (3-4 days at physiological dysfunction resulting apparently from both
21-24ºC), the parasite evacuates the host tissue and settles direct pathological damage induced by the parasite and as
within 2-6 h on a substrate in the water to form a cyst- a by-product of the stress response.
encapsulated tomont (dividing stage). Parasites evicted
from the tissue before the scheduled time for their Epizootiology: Ichthyophthirius multifiliis is one of the
spontaneous departure, fail to develop into tomonts and most common, troublesome and difficult to control of fish
eventually die (Ewing and Kocan, 1992; Paperna, 1985). pathogens. Epizootic infections have been reported in
Within the cyst, tomonts undergo successive binary cold water salmonid farms (also in Africa, Du Plessis,
fissions with a resulting yield of 250-2000 tomites 1952; Lombard, 1968) and warm water farmed carp, eels,
(infective, free swimming stages), which after release will Clarias gariepinus and Ictalurus punctatus (channel
seek a suitable host. The division of tomonts into tomites, catfish) (Meyer, 1970; Sarig, 1971; Hines and Spira,
in ambient temperatures of 25-28ºC, is completed within 1973a; Hines, 1975; Jackson, 1978; Khalifa et al., 1983).
15-20 h (Bauer, 1959; Meyer, 1969; Hoffman, 1978). Fish may maintain low, subclinical (enzootic) infection,
Invasion of tomites (teronts) (30-45 :m long) into the while encysted tomonts may persist in the habitat.
host integument is facilitated by the excretion of a sticky Enzootic infections in native fish have been found in
substance from subpellicular crystalline organelles named Lebistes reticulatus in Uganda (Paperna, 1972), in
mucocysts. Active penetration causes focal necrosis of the cichlids and cyprinids native to the Lake Kinneret system
epithelial cells. It has been suggested that hyaluronidase in Israel, in glass eels, cyprinids and cichlids in native
and other enzymes may be produced by the penetrating habitats of South Africa (Jackson, 1978; Van et al., 1984),
parasite (Ewing et al., 1985). In the absence of a suitable and in a variety of native fish in the southern United
host, tomites will lose their infective potential within 24 States (Allison and Kelly, 1963).
h at 24-28ºC (Ewing and Kocan, 1992). Higher Transition from nonclinical enzootic to epizootic
temperatures hasten trophont maturation and tomont clinical infection is usually stress-mediated, prompted by
division, but at lower temperatures, slower development adverse growth conditions such as overcrowding, poor
allows the growth of larger trophonts (0.8-1.0 mm in 5- feeding and excess nitrogenous waste. Epizootic
10ºC vs 0.5-0.7 mm in 20-24ºC), yielding tomonts with infection, however, never occurs in overwintering tilapia
higher numbers of tomite progeny (Ewing et al., 1986). In or Clarias gariepinus in Israel, or southern Africa, but
lower ambient temperatures the survival of the tomites is rather, coincides with the warming of the water in early
spring when fish are still kept in overcrowded conditions
prolonged, thus, allowing more time to locate a host. Low
after winter storage. In South Africa, 6.4% of wild glass
temperatures do not interrupt propagation; a full cycle is
eels in the Southern Cape are infected. Via these, fish
completed at 20ºC in 3-5 days, at 15ºC in 7-14 days and
infection has been introduced into eel nurseries where
at 10ºC in 21-35 days (Bauer, 1959; Meyer, 1969). Data
elvers, especially those not completely acclimated,
on the effect of other environmental parameters is less
succumbed to severe infestations (Hines, 1975; Jackson,
conclusive, although it has been suggested that dissolved
1978).
oxygen levels below 1 mg/L affect parasite reproduction
Spontaneous recovery has been observed in both
(Bauer, 1959).
natural infections in natural habitats and in holding
Pathology: Ichthyophthiriasis is fatal to fish of all sizes. facilities, and even in experimental infections in aquaria
Chronic infection will cause serious damage to the skin, (Paperna, 1972; Lahav and Sarig, 1973). The potential for
fin and gills; corneal infection impairs vision (Hines and spontaneous recovery varied with fish species. Infection
Spira, 1973a, 1974a). The infective stage invades the in scaled fish, notably cichlids, regressed faster than in
integumentary epithelium and becomes established in the smooth skinned fish (eels, Clarias spp. and other
basal layer of the epithelium just above the basal siluriforms, mirror and leather carp) (Paperna, 1972).
membrane. Cellular damage in low to moderate infections After recovery, fish were refractory to reinfection or
remains restricted to the infected site. In addition to the retained a merely subclinical chronic infection (Hines and
damage caused to epithelial cells by the feeding and
Spira, 1974c; Wahli and Meier, 1985; Paperna, 1985).
expanding parasites, in heavy infections mass exodus of
The observed interspecific variation in susceptibility to
parasites from the epithelial layer, having completed their
infection could, however, also result from differential
scheduled growth, causes its erosion and detachment from
compatibility of various fish species to man-made habitats
the basal membrane. In some infections, parasites cause
and variable vulnerability to stress.
widespread lysis of the inner layer of the epithelium.
Spontaneous recovery from infection and resistance
Prolonged infection also induces epithelial proliferation
and haemorrhagic inflammation, causing the integument to reinfection of recovered fish indicate that fish are
to become severely disintegrated (Hines and Spira, 1974a; capable of developing defence mechanisms against
Ventura and Paperna, 1985; Ewing et al., 1986). Hines I.multifiliis (Hines and Spira, 1974c). Spontaneous
222

Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2(5): 213-226, 2011
recovery observed in carp at temperatures as low as 10ºC accelerating aeration and reducing stocking densities).
(Lahav and Sarig, 1973) implies some protective Chemical parasiticides will be effective only through
responses other than via humoral antibody production, continuous or repeated daily application. Of the many
which becomes suppressed in carp below 12ºC (Avtalion, listed (Meyer, 1969), the only cost-effective remedy for
1981). Hines and Spira (1974c) demonstrated large scale farming systems is Malachite green at a dose
immobilisation of free swimming tomites with sera taken of 0.05 ppm for continuous application (3-4 days) or up to
from carp after their recovery from infection. The 0.15 ppm (depending on the specific fish tolerance which
infective stages were also shown to be unable to penetrate varies with species - siluriforms are particularly
susceptible). Formalin will dislodge some of the trophonts
the skin of resistant carp. Immobilisation tests with
and is often applied mixed with Malachite green (50 ppm
trophonts showed that in infected trout anti-parasitic
with 0.05 ppm) (Sarig, 1971).
activity of the mucus increases quickly after infection and
Systemic therapy seems to be the only means of
decreases soon after the infection has disappeared.These
effective control. Elimination of tissue trophozoites was
results could have simulated a The anti-parasitic activity
reported in several species of ornamental aquarium fish
of the serum, in the same fish, increases slowly but
fed medicated food (Tetra, MA 100/50) containing
remains at a higher level for at least 7 months (Wahli and
Malachite green in a non-water soluble formulation for 4
Meier, 1985). Fish immunised with Tetrahymena spp.
days (neither drug concentration in the food, nor daily
developed a resistance to a challenge of lchthyophthirius
rations are given; Schmahl et al., 1992). For use in
infection (Goven et al., 1981).
commercial food-fish culture for human consumption, the
Carp were immunised following controlled exposure cost efficiency of Malachite medicated feed formulations
to the infective tomite (teront) stage, and survived and their toxicity to humans must be considered.
challenges with high infective doses, but lost protection
after being immunosupressed by the administration of CONCLUSION
corticosteroids. These results could have simulated a
stress mediated situation. Levels of humoral antibodies in Fish culturist and the private sector need to know
immunosuppressed fish, however, remained the same as some common parasite diseases: Ichtyobodiasis,
in the immunised group, which further confirms the Coccidiosis, Ichtyopthiariasis, Trichodiniasis,
involvement of other than humoral type immune systems Heminthiasis, Crustacean parasite, Hirudinea infestation,
in the protection processes against l. multifiliis infections Flagellates and Ciliates, Taxonomy and diagnosis, Life
(Houghton and Matthews, 1990). Immunisation with cycle and biology, Epizootiology, pathology, control,
killed vaccines gave less satisfactory results, although Infections with parasite dinoflagellids and
better protection was obtained through intraperitoneal Ichthyophthiriasis as challenges faced in culture fisheries.
inoculation of live teronts (Burkart et al., 1990). results
could have simulated a the latter method, passively REFERENCES
transferred a protective immunity to their fry (Subasinghe
and Sommerville, 1989). Additionally to immunity passed Abaladejo, J.D. and J.R. Arthur, 1989. Some trichodinids
from mothers via eggs, demonstrable by antibodies in the (Protozoa: Ciliophora: Pertrichida) from freshwater
soluble extracts of fry tissues, a protective immunity was fishes imported into the Philippines. Asian Fisheries
acquired directly from the parent mouth during the Sci., 3: 1-25.
brooding period (Sin et al., 1994). Allison, R., and K.D. Kelly, 1963. An epizooticof
Ichthyophthirius multifiliis in a river fish population.
Control: Both trophonts, localised beneath the epithelial Prog. Fish Cult., 25: 149-150.
layer of the integument, and the encysted tomonts, Avtalion, R., 1981. Environmental control of the immune
attached to substrates in the aquatic habitat, are resistant response in fish. CRC Crit. Rev. Environ. Control.,
to practically all externally applied usable antiparasitic 11: 163-188.
agents. Infection can be effectively controlled only by Bassey, S.E., 2011. A Concise Dictionary of Parasitology.
destruction or elimination of the free dividing tomonts or 1st Edn., Zetus Concepts, Port Harcourt, pp: 115,
the tomites they release. In warm water systems (24- ISBN: 978-2954-40-3.
28ºC), three to four daily transfers of fish to clean tanks Basson, L. and J.D. Van, 1987. Trichodinid (Ciliophora;
will effectively reduce infection, while enabling the fish Peritricha) gill parasites of freshwater fish in South
to develop tolerance to reinfections. Tomonts can be Africa. Sys. Parasitol., 9: 143-151.
effectively removed from large circulating tanks by Basson, L. and J.G. Van, 1989. Differential diagnosis of
repeated brushing with vacuum suction. Spontaneous the genera in the family Trichodinidae (Ciliophora:
recovery and transition into a refractory state will be Peritrichida) with description of a new genus
further promoted by management techniques which ectoparasitic on freshwater fish from southern Africa.
alleviate stressing conditions (improving water flow, Sys. Parasitol., 13: 153-160.
223

Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2(5): 213-226, 2011
Basson, L. and J.G. Van, 1991. Trichodinids (Ciliophora: Fryer, G., 1961. Observation on the biology of the cichlid
Peritrichia) from a calanoid copepod and catfish from fish Tilapia variabilis Boulenger in the northern
South Africa and notes on host specificity Sys. waters of Lake Victoria and the Victoria Nile. Rev.
Parasitol., 18: 147-158. Zool. Bot. Afr., 64: 1-33.
Basson, L. and J.G. Van, 1993. First record of European
Fryer, G. and T.D. Iles, 1972. The Cichlid Fishes of the
trichodinids (Ciliophora: Peritrichida), Trichodina
Great Lakes of Africa. T.F.H. Publications, Neptune
acuta Lom, 1961 and T. reticulata Hirschmann ET
City, N.J.
Partsch, 1955 in South Africa. Act. Protozool. 32:
Foissner, W., G.L. Hoffman and A.J. Mitchell, 1985.
101-105.
Heteropolaria colisarum Foissner & Schubert, 1977
Basson, L., J.G. Van and I. Paperna, 1983. Trichodinid
(Protozoa: Epistylididae) of North American
parasites of cichlids and cyprinid fishes of South
Africa and Israel. Sys. Parasitol., 5: 245-257. freshwater fishes. J. Fish Dis., 8: 145-160.
Bauer, O.N., 1959. The ecology of freshwater fish. Inves. Goven, B.A., D.I. Dawe and J.B. Gratzeck, 1981.
Gosud. Nauch-Issled. Inst. Ozer. Rech. Ryb. Khoz, Protection of channel catfish (Ictalurus
49: 5-206 (In Russian, English transl. Israel Prog. punctatus) against Ichthyophthirius multifiliis
Sci. Trans. cat. No. 622, 1962, 3-215). (Fouquet) by immunisation with varying doses
Bauer, O.N., V.A. Musselius and Y.A. Strelkov, 1969. of Tetrahymena pyriformis (Lwoff) cilia.
Diseases” Moskva. In English: Israel Program for Aquaculture, 23: 269-273.
Scientific Translations, Jerusalem, 1973.
Heckmann, R.A. and T. Carroll, 1985. Host-parasite
Bondad-Reantaso, M.G. and J.R. Arthur, 1989.
studies of Trichophyra infesting cutthroat trout
Trichodines (Protozoa: Ciliophora: Peritrichida) of
(Salmo clarki) and longnose suckers (Catastomus
Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) in the
catastomus) from Yellowstone lake Wyoming. Great
Philippines. Asian Fisheries Sci., 3: 27-44. Entebbe
Basin Nat., 45: 255-265.
37: 128-130.
Hines R.S. and D.T. Spira, 1973a. Ichthyophthiriasis in
Burkart, M.A., T.G. Clark and H.W. Dickerson, 1990.
Immunisation of channel catfish, Ictalurus punctatus the mirror carp Cyprinus carpio L.I. Course of
Rafinesque, against Ichthyophthirius multifiliis infection. J. Fish Biol., 5: 385-392.
(Fouquet): killed versus live vaccines. J. Fish Dis., Hines, R.S. and D.T. Spira, 1973b. Ichthyophthiriasis in
13: 401-410. the mirror carp. II. Leucocyte response. J. Fish Biol.,
Du Plessis, S.S., 1952. Fish diseases in Transvaal C.S.A. 5: 527-534.
Symp. Hydrobiol. Inland Fish Entebbe, 37: 128-130. Hines, R.S and D.T. Spira., 1974a. Ichthyophthiriasis in
El-Tantawy, S.A.M. and S.L. Kazubski, 1986. The the mirror carp Cyprinus carpio (L.). III. pathology.
trichodinid ciliates from fish, Tilapia nilotica from J. Fish Biol., 6: 189-196.
the nile delta. Act. Protozool., 25: 439-444. Hines, R.S. and D.T. Spira., 1974b. Ichthyophthiriasis in
Esch, G.H., T.C. Hazen, R.V. Dimock and J.W. Gibbons,
the mirror carp Cyprinus carpio (L.). IV
1976. Thermal effluent and the epizootiology of the
Physiological dysfunction. J. Fish Biol., 6: 365-371.
ciliate Epistilis and the bacterium Aeromonas in
Hines, R.S. and D.T. Spira, 1974c. Ichthyophthiriasis in
association with centrachid fish. Trans. Am. Microsc.
the mirror carp Cyprinus carpio (L.). V. Acquired
Soc., 95: 687-693.
immunity. J. Fish Biol., 6: 373-378.
Ewing, M.S. and K.M. Kocan, 1992. Invasion and
Hoffman, G.L., 1978. Ciliates of Freshwater Fishes. In:
development strategies of Ichthyophthirius multifiliis,
Kreier, J.P., (Ed.), Parasitic Protozoa, II., pp:
a parasitic ciliate of fish. Parasitol. Today, 8:
584-632.
204-208.
Houghton, G. and R.A. Matthews, 1990.
Ewing, M.S., K.M. Kocan and S.A. Ewing, 1985.
Immunosuppression in juvenile carp, Cyprinus
Ichthyophthirius multifiliis (Ciliophora) invasion of
carpio L. the effect of the corticosteroid
gill epithelium. J. Protozool., 32: 305-310.
Ewing, M.S., M.E. Lynn and S.A. Ewing, 1986. Critical triamcinolone acetonide and hydrocortisone 21-
periods in development of Ichthyophthirius multifiliis hemisuccinate (cortisol) on acquired immunity and
(Ciliophora) populations. J. Protozool., 33: 388-391. the humoral antibody response to Ichthyophthirius
Fijan, N., 1961. Massive invasion of carp fry (Cyprinus multifiliis Fouquet. J. Fish Dis., 13: 269-280.
carpio L.) by protozoan of the genus Glossatella Jackson, P.B.N., 1978. Health and disease in intensive
(Croatian text, English summary). Vet. Arth. Zagreb, aquaculture. J.S.A. Vet. Ass., 49: 57-59.
32: 30-33. Jacobs, D.L., 1946. A new dinoflagellate from freshwater
Fitzgerald, M.E., B.A. Simco and L.B. Coons, 1982. fish. Trans. Am. Microscop. Soc., 65: 1-77.
Ultrastructure of the peritrich ciliate Ambyphrya Kabata, Z., 1985. Parasites and Diseases of Fish Cultured
ameiuri and its attachment to the gills of the catfish in the Tropics. Taylor & Francis, London and
Ictalurus punctatus. J. Protozool., 29: 213-217. Philadelphia.
224

Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2(5): 213-226, 2011
Kazubski, S.L., 1986. The trichodinid ciliates from fish, Miller, R.W. and W.R. Chapman, 1976. Epistilis and
Tilapia sp. from Lake Victoria (Kenya) and Aeromonas hydrophila infections in fishes from
description of Trichodina equatorialis nom. nov. Act. North Carolina reservoirs. Prog. Fish Cult., 38:
Protozool., 25: 445-448. 165-168.
Kazubski, S.L. and S.A.M. El-Tantawy, 1986. The ciliate Natividad, J.M., M.G. Bondad-Reantaso and J.R. Arthur,
Paratrichodina africana sp. n. (Peritricha, 1986. Parasites of Nile tilapia (Oreochromis
Trichodinidae) from Tilapia fish (Cichlidae) from niloticus) in the Philippines. In: Maclean, L.J., L.B.
Africa. Act. Protozoologica, 25: 433-438. Dizon and L.V. Hosillos, (Eds.), The First Asian
Khalifa, K.A., K.M. Al-Khayat and F.H. Al-Riab, 1983. Fisheries Forum. Asian Fisheries Society, Manila,
Ichthyophthiriasis in farmed fish in Iraq. J. Wild life Philippines, pp: 225-259.
Dis., 19: 145. Oldewage, W.H. and J.D. Van, 1987. Parasites and winter
Lahav, M. and S. Sarig, 1972. Control of unicellular mortalities of Oreochromis mossambica. S. Afr. J.
parasite fauna. Act. Parasitol. Pol., 22: 49-66. Wild. Res., 17: 7-12.
Lahav, M. and M. Sarig, 1973. Observation of laboratory Paperna, I. and A. Kohn, 1964. Studies on the host-
infection of carp by Ichthyophthirius multifiliis parasite relations between carp and; 24: 269-276.
Foquet Bull. Fish Cult. Israel-Bamidgeh, 25: 3-9. Paperna, I., 1968. Ectoparasitic infections of fish of Volta
Lightner, D., R. Redman, L. Mahoney, G. Dickerson and lake, Ghana. Bull. Wild. Dis. Ass., 4: 135-137.
Paperna, I., 1972. Ichthyophthirius multifiliis (Ciliata,
K. Fitzsimmons, 1988. Major Diseases Encountered
Holotrichia) in fish in Uganda. Prog. Fish. Cult., 34:
in Controlled Environment Culture of Tilapias in
162-164.
Fresh Water and Brackish Water over a Three Year
Paperna, I., 1980. Amyloodinium ocellatum (Brown,
Period in Arizona. In: Pullin, R.S.V., T. Bhukaswan,
1931) (Dinoflagellida) infestations in cultured marine
K. Tonguthai and J.L. Maclean, (Eds.), The Second
fish at Eilat, Red Sea: Epizootiology and pathology.
International Symposium on Tilapia in Aquaculture.
J. Fish Dis., 3: 363-372.
ICLARM Conference Proceedings 15, Dep. Fish.
Paperna I., 1984a. Reproductive cycle and tolerance to
Bangkok, Thailand, ICLARM Manila, Philippines,
temperature and salinity of Amyloodinium ocellatum
pp: 111-116.
(Brown, 1931) (Dinoflagellida). Ann. Parasitol. Hum.
Lom, J., 1973. The mode of attachment and relationship
Comp., 59: 7-30.
to the host of Apiosoma piscicola Blanchard and
Paperna, I., 1984b. Chemical control of Amyloodinium
Epistilis Iwoffi Faure-Fremiet, ectocommensals of
ocellatum (Brown 1931) (Dinoflagellida) infection:
freshwater fish. Folia Parasitol. (October 18,
In vitro tests and treatment trials with infected fishes.
2011Praha), 20: 105-112.
Aquaculture, 38: 1-18.
Lom, J., 1980. Cryptobia branchialis Nie from fish gills:
Paperna, I., 1984c. Winter Diseases of Cultured Tilapia.
ultrastructural evidence of ectocommensal function.
In: Agrigrup, (Ed.), Fish Diseases. Fourth COPRAQ
J. Fish Dis., 3: 427-436.
Session. Editora ATP Madrid (Espanha), pp: 139147.
Lom, J. and J.D. Corliss, 1968. Observation on the fine
Paperna, I., 1985. Infectious Diseases of fish in Extreme
structure of two species of the peritrich ciliate genus
Environment. Final Report to the Ministry for
Scyphidia and on their mode of attachment to their
Science and Art of Lower Saxony, Germany-
host. Trans. Am. Microsc. Soc., 87: 493-509.
unpublished.
Lom, J. and G. Schubert, 1983. Ultrastructural study of
Paperna, I. and J.P. Thurston., 1968. Report on
Piscinoodinium pillulare (Schaperclaus, 1954) Lom,
ectoparasitic infections of freshwater fish in Africa.
1981 with special emphasis on its attachment to the
Bull. Off. Int. Epizoot., 69: 1192-1206.
fish host. J. Fish Dis., 6: 411-428.
Paperna, I. and J.G. Van, 1983. Epizootiology and
Lombard, G.L., 1968. A survey of fish diseases and
pathology of Chilodonella hexasticha (Kiernik, 1909)
parasites encountered in Transvaal.The First Asian
(Protozoa, Ciliata) infections in cultured cichlid
Fisheries Forum. Asian Fisheries Society, Ma News
fishes. J. Fish Biol., 23: 441-450.
letter Limnol. Soc. S. Afr., 11: 23-29.
Paperna, I., J.G. Van and L. Basson, 1984. Review of
Meyer, F.P., 1969. Parasites of freshwater fishes; II. Diseases Affecting Cultured Cichlids. In: Fishelson,
Protozoa 3. Ichthyophthirius Multifiliis Fish Dis. L. and Z. Yaron, (Eds.), International Symposium on
Leaflets, U.S. Dep. Int. Bur. Fish. Wild. Washington Tilapia in Aquaculture, Proceedings. Tel Aviv
D.C., pp: 4. University Press, pp: 174-184.
Meyer, F.P., 1970. Seasonal fluctuations in the incidence Robertson, D.A., R.J. Roberts and A.M. Bullock, 1981.
of diseases on fish farms: A Symposium on Diseases Pathogenesis and autoradiographic studies of the
of Fishes and Shellfish. Am. Fish. Soc. Sp. Publ., 5: epidermis of salmonids infested with Ichthyobodo
21-29. nacator (Henneguy, 1883). J. Fish Dis., 4: 113-125.
225

Br. J. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 2(5): 213-226, 2011
Rowland, S.J., B.A. Ingram and F.B. Prokop, 1991. Van, J.G. and L. Basson, 1987. Host specificity of
Suspected cysts of the protozoan parasite trichodinid ectoparasites of freshwater fish Parasitol
Chilodonella hexasticha. Bull. Eur. Ass. 11: 159-161. Today, 3: 88-90.
Sarig, S., 1971. The Prevention and Treatment of
Van, J.G. and L. Basson, 1989. A further contribution to
Diseases of Warmwater Fish Under Subtropical
the taxonomy of the trichodinidae (Ciliophora:
Conditions, with Special Emphasis on Intensive
Peritricha) and a review of the taxonomic status of
Fish Farming. T.F.H Publications Inc., Jersey
some fish ectoparasitic trichodines. Sys. Parasitol.,
Citypp: 127.
Schmahl, G., H. Mehlhorn, H. Schmidt and G. Ritter, 14: 157-179.
1992. Treatment of fish parasites. 9. Effects of a Van, J.G., L. Basson and J. Theron, 1984. An
medicated food containing malachite green on experimental evaluation of the use of formalin to
Ichthyophthirius multifiliis Fouquet, 1876 control trichodiniasis and other ectoparasitic
(Hymenostomatidae, Ciliophora) in ornamental fish. protozoans on fry of Cyprinus carpio L. and
Parasitol. Res., 78: 183-192. Oreochromis mossambicus (Peters). S. Afr. J. Wild.
Schubert, G., 1968. The injurious effects of Costia
Res., 14: 42-48.
necatrix. Bull. Off. Int. Epiz., 69: 1171-1178.
Ventura, M.T and I. Paperna., 1985. Histopathology of
Shaharom-Harrison, F. and S.Z. Abdullah, 1988. Study of
Ichthyophthirius multifiliis infection in fishes. J. Fish
trichodinid ectoparasites from bighead carp
Biol., 27: 185-203.
Aristichthys nobilis, grass carp Ctenopharyngodon
idella and lampam jawa Puntius gonionotus in Viljoen, S. and J.G. Van, 1983. A taxonomic study of
peninsular Malaya. Trop. Biomed., 5: 131-137. sessile peritrichians of a small impoundment with
Shaharom-Harrison, F.M., I.G. Anderson, A.Z. Siti, notes on their substrate preferences. J. Limnol. Soc.
N.A.M. Shazili, K.J. Ang and T.L. Azmi, 1990. Sth. Afr., 9: 33-42.
Epizootics of Malaysian cultured freshwater pond Viljoen, S. and J.G. Van., 1985. Sessile peritrichs
fishes by Piscinoodinium pillularae (Schaperclaus,
(Ciliophora: Peritricha) from freshwater fish in the
1954) Lom, 1981. Aquaculture, 86: 127-138.
Transvaal, South Africa. S. Afr. J. Zool., 20: 79-96.
Sin, Y.M., K.H. Ling and T.J. Lam, 1994. Passive
Wahli, T. and W. Meier, 1985. Ichthyophthiriasis in
transfer of protective immunity against
Trout: Investigation of Natural Defence Mechanisms.
ichthyophthiriasis from vaccinated mother to fry in
tilapias, Oreochromis aureus. Aquaculture, 120: In: Ellis A.E., (Ed.), Fish and Shellfish Pathology,
229-237. Academic Press, London, pp: 347-353.
Sniezko, S.F., 1964. The effect of environmental stress on Woo, P.T.K., 1987. Cryptobia and cryptobiosis in fishes.
outbreaks of infectious diseases of fishes. J. Fish. Advan. Parasitol., 26: 199-237.
Biol., 6: 197-208.
Subasinghe, R.P and C. Sommerville, 1989. An
experimental study into the possible protection of fry
from Ichthyophthirius multifiliis (Fouquet) infections
during mouth breeding of Oreochromis mossambicus
(Peters). J. Fish Dis., 12: 143-149.
226

