

THE BIOLOGY
AND ECOLOGY
OF TINTINNID
CILIATES

T H E B I O L O G Y
A N D E C O L O G Y
O F T I N T I N N I D
C I L I AT E S
MODELS FOR
M ARINE PLANKTON
Edited by
John R. Dolan
Marine Microbial Ecology
Laboratoire d’Océanographie de Villefranche-sur-Mer
David J.S. Montagnes
Institute of Integrative Biology
University of Liverpool
Sabine Agatha
Department of Organismic Biology
University of Salzburg
D. Wayne Coats
Smithsonian Environmental Research Center
Diane K. Stoecker
University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication

This edition fi rst published 2013 © 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley’s global Scientifi c, Technical and Medical
business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered offi ce: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial offi ces: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA
For details of our global editorial offi ces, for customer services and for information about how to apply for permission to reuse
the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identifi ed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs
and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product
names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The
publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate
and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not
engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a
competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates: models for marine plankton / edited by John R. Dolan ... [et al.].
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-67151-1 (cloth)
1. Tintinnida. I. Dolan, John R. (John Richard), 1955–
QL368.T55B56 2012
579.4'9–dc23
2012010713
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in
electronic books.
Cover image: Morphological diversity in the plankton. A view of a single microscope fi eld (20× objective) of plankton net tow
material from the Bay of Villefranche in January 2011. Image by J.R. Dolan.
Cover design by: Simon Levy Associates
Set in 9/11 pt PhotinaMT by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
1 2013

Contents
CONTRIBUTORS, vii 3.3 Evolution of tintinnids, 49
3.4 How to read the tintinnid cladogram, 64
3.5 Molecular analysis and comparison with
CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO morphologic data, 69
TINTINNIDS, 1 3.6 Systematics, 75
3.7 Comparison with the evolution of related
1.1 Why a book on tintinnid ciliates?, 2 planktonic ciliates: the aloricate
1.2 What is a tintinnid ciliate?, 3 choreotrichids, oligotrichids, and
1.3 The lorica as the defi ning characteristic of halteriids, 81
tintinnid ciliates, 3 3.8 Key points, 83
1.4 History of tintinnid studies, 7 Acknowledgments, 84
1.5 Tintinnids as model organisms for marine
plankton, 13
1.6 Key points, 16
CHAPTER 4 ECOPHYSIOLOGY AND
Acknowledgments, 16
BEHAVIOR OF TINTINNIDS, 85
4.1 Introduction, 86
CHAPTER 2 THE TINTINNID LORICA, 17
4.2 Feeding, 86
4.3 Growth, 99
2.1 Introduction, 18
4.4 Swimming behavior, 106
2.2 Diversity, formation, and variability of
4.5 Response to abiotic factors and interactions
loricae, 19
with biotic factors, 111
2.3 Ultrastructure of loricae, 32
4.6 Tintinnids as models and in models, 114
2.4 Chemical composition of loricae, 35
4.7 Key points, 121
2.5 Lorica sedimentation, 40
Acknowledgments, 121
2.6 Key points, 41
Acknowledgments, 41
CHAPTER 5 PREDATORS OF
CHAPTER 3 SYSTEMATICS AND TINTINNIDS, 122
EVOLUTION OF TINTINNID CILIATES, 42
5.1 Introduction, 123
3.1 Introduction, 43 5.2 Predators of tintinnids, 133
3.2 History of tintinnid taxonomy and 5.3 Anti-predator defenses of tintinnids, 141
systematics, 44 5.4 Top-down control of tintinnids, 142
v

vi Contents
5.5 Importance of tintinnids as prey for the 8.4 Mesozoic tintinnids and calpionellids: same
predator, 143 shape, different composition, 191
5.6 Tintinnids as vectors for algal toxins, 143 8.5 Cenozoic tintinnids: sparse, 192
5.7 Key points, 144 8.6 Organic and agglutinated phanerozoic fossils:
Acknowledgments, 144 the most likely candidates, 193
8.7 Conclusions and perspectives, 195
8.8 Key points, 197
CHAPTER 6 PARASITES OF Acknowledgments, 197
TINTINNIDS, 145
CHAPTER 9 TINTINNIDS IN
6.1 Background, 146
MICROZOOPLANKTON COMMUNITIES, 198
6.2 Dinofl agellate parasites: morphology and
infection cycle, 149
9.1 Ecology of microzooplankton, 199
6.3 Molecular evolution of dinofl agellates
9.2 Quantitative importance of tintinnids in
parasitizing tintinnids, 160
microzooplankton assemblages, 205
6.4 Ecology of tintinnid parasites, 165
9.3 Characteristics that set tintinnids apart from
6.5 Summary and future directions, 169
other microzooplankton, 211
6.6 Key points, 169
9.4 Key points, 212
Acknowledgments, 170
Acknowledgments, 213
CHAPTER 7 COMPARATIVE BIOLOGY OF CHAPTER 10 DIVERSITY AND
TINTINNID CYSTS, 171 DISTRIBUTIONS OF TINTINNIDS, 214
7.1 Introduction, 172 10.1 Introduction, 215
7.2 Morphology, 173 10.2 Biogeography, 215
7.3 Encystment and excystment, 176 10.3 Assemblages of coastal systems, 233
7.4 Ecological function of cysts, 182 10.4 Assemblages of open waters, 239
7.5 Key points, 184 10.5 Key points, 241
Acknowledgments, 185 Acknowledgments, 243
REFERENCES, 244
CHAPTER 8 FOSSIL TINTINNIDS, 186
ORGANISM INDEX, 288
8.1 Introduction: a paucity of data, 187
8.2 Proterozoic tintinnids: no evidence of a SUBJECT INDEX, 293
beginning, 187
8.3 Paleozoic tintinnid reports: too thin The color plate section can be found between
to know, 191 pages 136 and 137

Contributors
Sabine Agatha Takashi Kamiyama
Department of Organismic Biology, University of Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute
Salzburg Fisheries Research Agency
Hellbrunnerstrasse 34, 5020 Salzburg, Austria 3 - 27 - 5, Shinhama, Shiogama, Miyagi 985 - 0001,
Sabine.Agatha@sbg.ac.at Japan
kamiyama@affrc.go.jp
Tsvetan R. Bachvaroff
Smithsonian Environmental Research Center Jere H. Lipps
P.O. Box 28, 647 Contees Wharf Rd. John D. Cooper Archaeology and Paleontology Center
Edgewater, MD 21037, USA Santa Ana, CA, USA
bachvarofft@gmail.com jlipps@fullerton.edu
and
D. Wayne Coats University of California Museum of Paleontology
Smithsonian Environmental Research Center Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
P.O. Box 28, 647 Contees Wharf Rd. jlipps@berkeley.edu
Edgewater, MD 21037, USA
coatsw1@gmail.com George B. McManus
Department of Marine Sciences
John R. Dolan University of Connecticut
Marine Microbial Ecology 1080 Shennecossett Rd.
Laboratoire d ’ Oc é anographie de Villefranche - sur - Mer Groton CT 06340, USA
CNRS Universit é Paris VI UMR 7093 george.mcmanus@uconn.edu
S tation Zoologique, B.P. 28
06230 Villefranche - sur - Mer, France David J.S. Montagnes
dolan@obs - vlfr.fr Institute of Integrative Biology
University of Liverpool
Micah Dunthorn BioSciences Building
University of Kaiserslautern Crown Street
Department of Ecology Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK
Erwin - Schroedinger Street dmontag@liv.ac.uk
67653 Kaiserslautern, Germany
dunthorn@rhrk.uni - kl.de Michèle Laval- Peuto
Chemin des Campons 144
06480 La Colle - sur - Loup, France
mpeuto.moreau@orange.fr
vii

viii Contributors
Richard W. Pierce Diane K. Stoecker
P.O. Box 132 University of Maryland Center for Environmental
North Attleboro Science
MA, USA Horn Point Laboratory
rw_pierce@verizon.net 2020 Horns Point Road
P.O. Box 775
Luciana F. Santoferrara Cambridge MD 21613, USA
Department of Marine Sciences stoecker@umces.edu
University of Connecticut
1080 Shennecossett Rd. Michaela C. Str üder-Kypke
Groton CT 06340, USA Department of Molecular and Cell Biology
luciana.santoferrara@uconn.edu University of Guelph
Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada
Paul Simon michaela.strueder.kypke@uoguelph.ca
Max Planck Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids
N ö thnitzer Strasse 40, 01187 Dresden, Germany
paul.simon@cpfs.mpg.de
Thorsten Stoeck
University of Kaiserslautern
Department of Ecology
Erwin - Schroedinger Street
67653 Kaiserslautern, Germany
stoeck@rhrk.uni - kl.de

Chapter 1
Introduction to
Tintinnids
John R. Dolan1
1 Laboratoire d ’ Oc é anographie de Villefranche - sur - Mer, CNRS Universit é Paris VI,
Villefranche - sur - Mer, France
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
1

2 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
1.1 WHY A BOOK ON TINTINNID CILIATES? ferent facets of a well - circumscribed group of single -
celled eukaryotes, organisms of the marine plankton.
Tintinnids are “ curious ” because their morphology is Although tintinnid ciliates are characteristic of the
unusual for planktonic organisms: it is a shelled cell. marine plankton, there are a few species found in
There are other groups of shelled organisms in the freshwaters. Freshwater tintinnids often appear to be
plankton, such as foraminifera and pteropods, but very ephemeral in lake plankton, blooming and then virtu-
few are as diverse as the tintinnids. They show an ally disappearing. In this book, we focus on marine
astounding variety of forms in their shells (loricae), plankton; freshwater forms will not be treated, but
and dozens of different types can be found in just a few mentioned only in passing.
liters of seawater (Dolan & Stoeck 2 011 ). Nonetheless,
all have a similar fundamental trophic role in the
pelagic ecosystem: that of grazers at the base of the
food web feeding on nanoplankton, for the most part.
They are, therefore, ecologically united as planktonic
ciliates, mainly consumers of nanoplankton, and mor-
phologically and phylogenetically united as shelled,
choreotrich ciliates. The biology and ecology of this
group merit investigation if we are to understand how
species- rich planktonic food webs work.
Tintinnids attracted the attention of some of the fi rst
microscopists, who were fascinated by such “ shelled
infusoria” . From the early oceanographic expeditions,
the variety of forms of their loricae catalogued from
the plankton net - tow material served as an example of
biodiversity in the plankton. As they are among the few
protist organisms sampled using plankton nets, they
were for a time considered a major component of the
microzooplankton (zooplankton ranging in size from
20 to 200 μ m), grazers of the smallest planktonic algae
in the ocean (Beers 1982 ). Beginning in the 19th
century and still today, tintinnids have been the focus
of detailed studies that together form a considerable
body of literature consisting of hundreds of reports. In
recent years, monographic treatment of tintinnids has
seen something of a renaissance with the appearance
of comprehensive works on tintinnids of the South
Atlantic (Alder 1 999 ), Brazilian territorial waters
(Gomes et al. 2006 ), Lebanese coastal waters (Abboud -
Abi Saab 2008 ), and the Adriatic Sea (Krsinic 2010 ).
The literature on tintinnids constitutes a wealth of
information covering a surprisingly wide range of
topics and approaches. This information has, however, Fig. 1.1 Life - cycle stages in E utintinnus inquilinus . (a) A
remained scattered across hundreds of journal articles trophont (feeding stage) cell. (b) An early stage of binary
fi ssion showing the oral primordium (OP), which will
and monographs published over nearly 150 years.
develop into a new mouth. (c) The fi nal stage of cell division.
This volume is an attempt to bring together material
(d) An early stage of conjugation. (e) A conjugating pair
covering distinct aspects and topics to allow a compre-
showing a well- developed cytoplasmic bridge (CB) through
hensive view of the biology and ecology of tintinnids.
which nuclear material will be exchanged. Loricae are about
The ultimate goal in assembling this material is to pro- 100 μ m long. Images are of Lugol ’ s - fi xed cells; sample from
vide a digest (a complete compendium would required a mixed culture provided by F. Lombard. For color version,
a much longer book) showing the complexity of the dif- see Plate 1.1 .

Introduction to tintinnids 3
1.2 WHAT IS A TINTINNID CILIATE?
Formally, tintinnids are ciliate protists of the class
Spirotrichea, subclass Choreotrichida, order Tintinn-
ida. Among the unicellular eukaryotes, the common
characteristics of ciliates are possession of cilia during
all or some part of the life cycle, nuclear dualism
(macro- and micronuclei), and sexual recombination
through conjugation, separate from reproduction
which in tintinnids and most other ciliates is through
binary fi ssion (Fig. and Plate 1.1 ). Ciliates in the marine
plankton are largely dominated by members of the
class Spirotrichea, all of which have mouth cilia in the
form of polykinetids (trichia), which are compound
cilia that resemble bristles more than fi ne hairs
arranged in a rough circle, more or less a spiral, around
the oral cavity. Most marine planktonic ciliates are
members of either the subclasses Choreotrichia or Oli-
gotrichia. In both groups the oral polykinetids are well
developed, serving both for locomotion and feeding.
The subclass Oligotrichia (meaning “ few trichia ” ),
comprises forms with the oral polykinetids arranged in
an open circle around the oral cavity and few cilia on
the cell, such as in the familiar (often cone- shaped)
oligotrichs of the genera Strombidium and L aboea . In
contrast, species in the Choreotrichia have oral polyki-
netids arranged in closed circle around the oral cavity
and usually relatively conspicuous rows of cilia on the
cell surface. Choreotrich ciliates include species of the
genera Strobilidium (often sphere - shaped), Strombidi-
nopsis (often carrot- shaped), as well as species in which
the ciliate cell is always surrounded by a shell (lorica),
the tintinnid ciliates.
Besides the lorica, there are cytological characteris-
tics that distinguish tintinnids from other choreotrichs
(Fig. 1.2 ). The oral ciliature includes structures called
tentaculoids, which appear to be related to prey capture Fig. 1.2 Basic morphology of a tintinnid in a cut -a way
(see Chapter 4 ). The posterior end of the cell is a con- drawing of T intinnopsis campanula , adapted from Faur é -
Fremiet (1924) . The oral cilia are comprised of oral
tractile, stalk - like, peduncle which connects the cell to
membranelles arranged in closed circle around the
its lorica. The tintinnid cell surface has a distinct fi eld
funnel - shaped oral cavity. Interspersed between the oral
of rows of short cilia, the somatic ciliature (see Chapter
membranelles are tentaculoids, structures presumed to be
3 ). These very brief characterizations are based on
related to prey capture. The cell surface is covered in part by
the detailed descriptions and analyses found in Lynn rows of short cilia, the somatic cilia. The macronucleus is
(2008) , Lynn & Small (2000) , and Corliss (1979) . often evident. The posterior end of the ciliate cell is attached
to the lorica by a contractile peduncle.
1.3 THE LORICA AS THE DEFINING
CHARACTERISTIC OF TINTINNID CILIATES
In addition to being the only choreotrich ciliates with
loricae, tintinnids are also the only ciliates of the

4 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
plankton with loricae. Although there are cytological which tintinnid species with the different loricae are
characteristics that distinguish tintinnids, the defi ning the dominant forms: coastal and open waters (see
one is its lorica or shell (although other cytological Chapter 10 ).
characters distinguish tintinnids from other choreot- Mineral particles are used in the “ agglutinated ”
richs or “ naked oligotrichs ” : see Chapter 3 ). The lorica, loricae of species in the genera Tintinnopsis , Stenose-
although of various shapes ranging from tubular to mella , Tintinnidium , and Leprotintinnus . These forms are
vase - or bowl - shaped, is always open at one end, the generally restricted to coastal waters. In some genera
oral end, and closed or tapered at the opposite, or there are species that incorporate the hard parts
bottom end. Within the lorica the tintinnid cell is of some microalgae. The coccoliths from coccolitho-
attached near the bottom end by a contractile portion phorid algae are used by some species ( Codonella ,
of the ciliate cell, a pedicle or peduncle (see Fig. 1.1 ). Dictyocysta , Codonellopsis , and A canthostomella ) or the
While feeding, the cell extends out of the lorica and the remains of diatoms (L aackmanniella ). The arrangement
tintinnid is propelled mouth - end forward. If disturbed, of “ agglutined particles ” can be quite precise. For
the cell retracts into the lorica. example, in C odonella elongata , the coccolithophores
The contractile behavior and the lorica as the defi n- are all oriented in the same “ face - out ” direction (Fig.
ing character were apparent in the text of the fi rst 1.3 ). However, not all species show precision in particle
description of a tintinnid by O.F. M ü ller published in use. Examples of the variety of forms with agglutinated
1778 (Box 1.1 ). The “ creature ” was described as T ri- lorica are shown in Fig. and Plate 1.4 . These species
choda inquilinus ; all ciliates were placed in the genus generally dominate tintinnid assemblages in coastal
Trichoda by M ü ller; i nquilinus – “ lodger ” or “ occupant ” waters but some can be found in open waters.
– refers to the ciliate as the inhabitant of a structure. “ Hyaline loricae ” groups tintinnids of a very large
Remarkably, not only was the contractile behavior variety of shapes, sizes, and architectures whose sole
noted but also that reproduction was by cell division. common characteristic is a lack of extraneous particles
M ü ller noted that the “ mother cell ” (the proter that in the lorica. The morphologies range from the trans-
retains the original mouth) abandons the lorica to the parent small (50 μ m diameter) bowl - shaped A scamp-
newly formed daughter cell. The form he described bellia tortulata to the large, conical C yttarocylis cassis
might be the species now called Eutintinnus inquilinus which shows a sculpted surface. Although some
(shown in Fig. 1.1 ), known to attach to particles hyaline lorica species are found in coastal waters (e.g.
(Faur é - Fremiet 1908 ; Jonsson et al. 2004 ). The appel- species of Helicostomella , Favella ) typically they are the
lation Tintinnus inquilinus was given to the species by dominant forms in open- water tintinnid assemblages.
Schrank (1803) who removed it from Trichoda , giving A sampling of the diversity of hyaline - lorica forms is
it its own genus, without unfortunately noting why he shown in Fig. and Plate 1 .5 .
chose the term “ Tintinnus ” , which most commonly The term “ lorica ” refers to the armor or protective
refers to the ringing of a bell. clothing worn by roman soldiers. Dujardin (1841)
Very early on it was noted that distinct types of lorica credits Ehrenberg (1832) with using the word in his
exist among tintinnids and that these may represent Latin text to describe the protective structures, Panzer
natural groups (Clapar è de & Lachmann 1858 ). A in the German text, of tintinnids as well as other pro-
completely lorica - based taxonomy and phylogeny was tists and rotifers. Indeed, the hard structures of many
introduced by Kofoid & Campbell (1929, 1939) and different protists appear early in the fossil record and
identifi cations are today still based on lorica morphol- likely evolved as protection against predation by other
ogy. However, culture studies and recent molecular protists (Porter 2011 ). Among planktonic organisms,
phylogenies have shown that lorica characteristics the seemingly odd morphologies of present - day forms
do not always refl ect phylogenetic relationships (see are thought to be the result of a “ watery arms race ”
Chapters 2 and 3 ). Nonetheless, for practical reasons, between prey and predator (Smetacek 2 001 ; Hamm
tintinnids traditionally have been divided into two & Smetacek 2007 ). In contrast, Kofoid & Campbell
groups corresponding to easily distinguished lorica (1939) stated that the lorica probably did not evolve as
types: one with agglutinated (or agglomerated) loricae protective device because it affords little protection
composed of particles and another, those with hyaline, against large metazoan predators such as copepods.
generally transparent, loricae. The two lorica types However, tintinnids are subject to predation from a
very approximately correspond to different habitats in very wide range of predators (Chapter 5 ) as well as

Introduction to tintinnids 5
BOX 1.1 Translation of the 1779 Latin text of O.F. Mü ller
Trichoda inquilinus (T. lodger): a sheathed trichoda, with a hyaline, cylindrical, shell and
a little footstalk
This is among the smallest creatures, and with the slow to very many things and moves about slowly; it swims
work of a simple lens, the eye observes a very small around vehemently with the head clinging on to the
point with great mobility. The shell, whether egg- outside of the sheath with the work of the hairs; if it is
shaped, oblong, smooth, is so glassy transparent that clinging on to the base of the sheath, fi xed only a little,
otherwise invisible things might be seen. For this crea- whether extended in a perpendicular or oblique fashion,
ture is a swimmer, which you might say has a pivoted an alternate movement of the top of the head follows,
footstalk. . . moving in water continuously or less so.
I have been able to observe these things for a long time I have found two swimming together lengthwise.
with my eyes unaided, being apparent in great numbers. Whether it was at the base of the sheath, or lying higher
The most apt name should account for the quick motion up, or lower than the top, and the head was pulled
and the rotation of the hairs. Often the organ of the hairs about in every sense: at length it tore itself apart, front
is spread out resembling a comb, then the more distinct, from back.
outermost, blackish teeth, in the hyaline jelly of the true I saw a certain one, the heads of which were more
center, which are show various movements, are seen. than threefold, and they fully occupied the whole
The clear footstalk runs through the middle of the sheath even with the footstalk inconspicuously or for a
sheath, fi xed though at the wide base. Often it is con- short time; also two by two the little creatures lived in
tracted, the hairs are together, the little head is sub- the sheath with their own footstalks.
merged, and the side strings of the sheath stand forth like An extension developed, while I watched the little
a pregnant creature stretching. Slowly the head retreats creature growing. The head is divided in the middle
back, with the hairs, whether thin tentacles or spread and the bottom at the base of the footstalk, while what
about, extend, barely occupying the entrance of the happens must be due to the workings of the hairs. By
sheath, intently moving for nutrition. I saw it withdraw what means the middle of the sheath is truly divided I
within the sheath and be spread out at the top of the head. know not even though keeping them in clean and pure
Having been disturbed by dust (and I don’ t know sea water, even in entirely non- renewed water, through
where the center is), it becomes very bare, it adheres the whole of winter 1776, 1777 and 1778.
Fig. B1.1 The lodger occupies various places; small, scaly sheaths called Monads are found together and sticking
together in the fi fth image. A series of fertile mothers having taken positions to divide, laden and mature, and at the
last image a mother is now swimming away. O.F. M ü ller (1779) pp. 8 – 9 (Latin translation by B. Scott , University of
Liverpool).

6 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 1.4 Some tintinnid species with agglutinated loricae:
Tintinnopsis radix (a), T . campanula (b), T . dadayi (c), T . spiralis
(d),Codonella elongata covered with coccoliths (e),
Tintinnidium sp. (f), S tenosemella ventricosa (g), L eprotintinnus
pellucidus (h), and C odonellopsis schabi (i). Species names are
attributed based on lorica morphology. All the specimens are
Lugol ’ s - fi xed cells except for Codonella elongata which was a
live specimen. For color version, see Plate 1.4 .
parasitic infections (Chapter 6 ). In reality, the iden-
tity of the major source of mortality for tintinnids is
unknown so it is diffi cult to assess the possible use of
the lorica as a protective device.
M any explanations other than “ a rmor” for the lorica
have been suggested. These include that of a fl otation
Fig. 1.3 Scanning electron micrograph of a specimen of
aid in the case of the hyaline lorica (Kofoid 1930 ;
Codonella elongata from the Bay of Villefranche. The upper
Campbell 1 926) , alternatively as aid in quickly sinking
panel shows the lorica with a bottom portion cut away with
away from predators in the case of the agglutinated
a high - energy electron beam. The lower panel shows the
lorica of Stenosemella (Capriulo et al. 1 982) , and main-
interior surface of the lorica. Note that the lorica is
agglomerated with the coccolithes of H elicosphaera carteri taining directionality in swimming in the case of the
oriented as they are on the living algae. Images are courtesy elongate nail or spike - shaped lorica of oceanic forms
of Fran ç ois Guyot and Charles Bachy . An image of a live (Kofoid & Campbell 1939 ). A lorica, like projecting
specimen of C. elongata is shown in Fig. 1.4 . spines or trailing structures in other small zooplank-
ton, may reduce swimming speed while enhancing the
capture of food particles by increasing fl uid motion

Introduction to tintinnids 7
variety of loricae found among tintinnids may serve a
variety of functions.
1.4 HISTORY OF TINTINNID STUDIES
Early mentions of tintinnids are mostly in taxonomic
treatises and consist of little more than simple list-
ings in species catalogues of “ infusoria ” (i.e., M ü ller
1776 , Schrank 1803 ; Ehrenberg 1832 ; Dujardin
1841 ). The fi rst detailed consideration of tintinnids
was by Clapar è de & Lachmann (1858– 1860, part 1,
pp. 192 – 221) who provided notes on the morphology
and ecology of most of the 17 known species, and
placed them all in a single genus, Tintinnus. They
remarked on the abundance of tintinnids in marine
waters compared with their rarity in freshwaters, and
the diversity of lorica types. The appearance of more
marine biological studies of tintinnids marked the last
quarter of the 19th century.
In 1873 Ernst Haeckel published the fi rst paper
devoted exclusively to tintinnids. He not only described
new species from waters off Messina (Italy) and Lan-
zarote (Canary Islands), but also the development and
Fig. 1.5 Examples of tintinnid species with hyaline loricae: release of what he thought were reproductive spores.
Amphorides quadrilineata (a), A mplectella collaria (b), We now know that he was the fi rst to describe parasites
Climacocylis scalaria (c), A canthostomella conicoides (d), in tintinnids (see Chapter 6) . A few years later appeared
Protorhabdonella simplex (e), E piplocylis blanda (f), the observations of Herman Fol (1881, 1883, 1884)
Xystonellopsis paradoxa (g), Ormosella trachelium (h), on tintinnids from the Bay of Villefranche - sur - Mer,
Proplectella elipisoida (i), Dadayiella ganymedes (j), Dictyocysta describing investigations into the chemical nature of
lepida (k), M etacylis mediterranea (l), Parafavella parumdentata
the lorica (see Chapter 2 ) and some new species. These
(m),Parundella messinensis (n), A scampbellia tortulata (o),
reports were followed by a series papers from the
Eutintinnus stramentus (p), Undella hyalina (q), Helicostomella
Zoological Station in Naples fi rst by G é za Enzt, senior
subulata (r), Salpingella acuminata (s), R habdonella spiralis (t),
(1884, 1885) and then Eugene von Daday (1886,
andCyttarocylis cassis (u). All the specimens are Lugol ’ s -
fi xed cells. For color version, see Plate 1.5 . 1887) who published the fi rst monographic review of
tintinnids (Daday 1 887 ). The number of known species
rose to 70 with the monograph; he also included a
key to the species listed (many of which were new)
and reviewed reports of anatomy and what little was
around the oral cilia (Emlet & Strathmann 1985 ). The known of physiology as well as biogeography.
lorica can also serve as an attachment device. Jonsson Detailed observations on feeding and fi ne structure
et al. (2004) found that in some species of Eutintinnus , did not begin until the early 20th century, perhaps
the tintinnid can reversibly attach its lorica to detrital because maintaining tintinnids in the laboratory
particles thus increasing its feeding rate owing to the proved diffi cult (as M ü ller had remarked back in 1778).
“ tethering effect ” (Strathmann & Gr ü nbaum 2006 ) Emmanuel Faur é - Fremiet published in 1908 the fi rst
and reducing its susceptibility to copepod predation. extensive report on a tintinnid, now known as E utintin-
Lastly, the lorica may furnish protection against ultra- nus , possibly the same species M ü ller observed, based
violet radiation (Armstrong & Brasier 2005 ), allowing on both living and fi xed specimens. This was followed
tintinnids to exploit the near- s urface waters. There by G é za Entz junior (1909b) who notably included the
appears no reason not accept the possibility that the study of fi ne - structure based on thin sections of what

8 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
is now known as F avella . These studies of tintinnids, sively the tintinnids from the Agassiz Expedition.
based on specimens from near - shore waters, were soon In this second monograph they re - named and re -
eclipsed by the development of biological oceanogra- arranged many tintinnid genera and described some
phy. In terms of tintinnid studies, oceanography turned new species yielding a new total of 726 species (Kofoid
the focus toward the open sea, fi rst with regard to tax- & Campbell 1939 ). Other notable studies include those
onomy and new species, and later to the role of tintin- of Hada working in Japanese waters and the Western
nids in marine ecosystems. Tropical Pacifi c (1937, 1938), and Campbell ’ s report
Distinct forces prompted the development of biologi- on material from the last voyage of the Carnegie
cal oceanography in the late 19th and early 20th cen- throughout the Pacifi c (1942). Although such efforts
turies. These ranged from the primary one of the need in descriptive zoology continued in the latter half of
to understand the dynamics underlying exploited the 20th century, their pace slowed considerably with
marine populations, especially herring and cod, to a shift in focus toward the role of tintinnids in marine
nationalistic desires to show mastery of the seas and food webs.
science (Mills 1989 ). Regardless of the precise reasons A turn toward ecological studies was belated because
behind the great oceanographic expeditions of the tintinnids and other small protist grazers had long
early 20th century, the study of tintinnids profi ted been suspected to be of importance. Naive views on
greatly. Although singularly neglected by the Eng- marine food webs can be understandably summarized
lish Challenger Expedition, in the subsequent ocea- by the saying “ Big fi sh eat little fi sh ” (Fig. 1.7 ). However,
nographic expeditions of many countries tintinnids by the late 1800s it was recognized that, rather than
were granted the same attention as that given to other plant and organic matter supplied by rivers feeding
planktonic groups such as diatoms, dinofl agellates, small fi sh, plankton formed the base of marine food
and copepods. The major publications include Karl webs. Furthermore, plankton production was likely
Brandt ’ s monographs from the German 1899 Plank- in some manner linked to exploited fi sh populations.
ton Expedition (Brandt 1906, 1907 ), the Hans Laack- This view provided the scientifi c justifi cation of Victor
mann reports from the German South Polar Expedition Hensen ’ s Plankton Expedition in 1889, which is gener-
of 1901 – 1903 (Laackmann 1907, 1910 ), Alphonse ally considered as the fi rst campaign of biological ocea-
Meunier’ s reports from the Duke of Orleans Arctic nography (Mills 1989 ). The studies of Kofoid (1897)
expedition of 1907 (Meunier 1910 ), and Eugen J ö r- and Lohmann (1901) had shown that most of the
gensen ’ s monograph from the Danish Thor Expedi- biomass in the plankton was missed using plankton
tion to the Mediterranean in 1908 – 1910 (J ö rgensen nets, even the “ fi ne silk ” used to sample for tintinnids
1924 ). These largely taxonomic treatises, catalogu- and other small plankton.
ing species occurrences and describing new forms, By the 1920s careful studies of coastal fi sh popula-
reached their apex with the reports of Charles Kofoid tions and food webs, for example the herring food web,
and Arthur Campbell on material from the Agassiz revealed the complexity of predator – prey relationships
Expedition (Fig. 1.6 ) of the USA to the Eastern Tropi- in the plankton (Fig. 1.8 and see Chapter 5 , Fig. 5.4 ).
cal Pacifi c in 1904– 1905 (Kofoid & Campbell 1929, Thus, by the 1930s, the planktonic community was
1939 ). known to be dominated, at least in terms of biomass,
In describing the species found in material from the by very small organisms and the community as a
Agassiz expedition, Kofoid and Campbell produced whole was characterized by complex predator – prey
two monographs. The fi rst, “ A conspectus ” (Kofoid & relationships. Nonetheless, studies on the ecology of
Campbell 1929 ), was a compendium of previously tintinnids and other small grazers of the plankton did
described forms as well as new species from the expedi- not begin in earnest until the 1960s.
tion material and other samples they collected. At that The period of relative inactivity from the 1930s to
time the literature contained descriptions over 1750 the 1950s was attributed by John Beers (1982) to the
different forms, variously described as species, sub - development of pigment methods in phytoplankton
species, and varieties of tintinnids. The “ conspectus ” studies which replaced the use of microscopic analysis
ascribed species status to 705 forms in 51 genera, all of water samples. Meanwhile, zooplankton studies
based uniquely on features of the lorica (Kofoid & continued to rely on net sampling. The effect was then
Campbell 1 929) . Some years later, Kofoid and Camp- that microzooplankters, such as tintinnids, were over-
bell published a second report, which concerned exclu- looked or ignored because few people were examining

Introduction to tintinnids 9
Fig. 1.6 Station map of the Agassiz expedition (from Agassiz 1906 ). Inset image, courtesy of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) image library, shows the A lbatross on station . Louis Agassiz organized the oceanographic
expedition which explored the Eastern Tropical Pacifi c in 1904 – 1905 with the assistance of the US navy using the US
Fisheries Commission steamerAlbatross . The scientifi c staff included two notable “ assistants ” : C.A. Kofoid and H.B. Bigelow.
The material gathered during the expedition was the basis for the two widely used monographs of Kofoid & Campbell (1929,
1939) .
water samples with a compound microscope. What unequivocally that microzooplankton represented a
occurred in the early 1960s was fi rstly that zooplank- considerable biomass. Microzooplankton were then
ton researchers were pointedly reminded that plankton apparently “ re - discovered ” in the 1960s so that by the
nets were not sampling all the grazers, that is all of the end of the decade, John Ryther (1969) in “ Photosyn-
zooplankton (Banse 1962 ; Hansen & Andersen 1962 ). thesis and fi sh production in the sea ” could simply
Furthermore, the use of size - fractionation reminded state:
phytoplankton researchers that small phytoplankton
often accounted for most of the standing stock (see, for “ Intermediate between the nannoplank-
example, McAllister et al. 1 960 ) and these small cells ton and the carnivorous zooplankton are
were not usually thought of as major food items of the a group of herbivores, the microzoo-
zooplankton sampled with nets. plankton, whose ecological signifi cance
Field studies focusing on microzooplankton, in par- is a subject of considerable current
ticular those of Beers & Stewart (1967, 1969) , showed interest. Representatives of this group

10 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
include protozoans such as Radiolaria,
Foraminifera, and Tintinnidae, and larval
nauplii of microcrustaceans. These
organisms, which may occur in concen-
trations of tens of thousands per cubic
Publisher's Note: meter, are the primary herbivores of the
Image not available open sea.”
in the electronic edition
Microzooplankton were placed, for a time, at the
center of a new view of marine food webs (Fig. 1 .9) .
However, it was recognized that protozoan ecology, as
a whole and including planktonic protists, was sorely
under - developed (Corliss 1973 ). Perhaps not surpris-
ingly, in the ensuing years, the ecology and physiology
of tintinnids received considerable attention.
Fig. 1.7 The naive view of marine food webs as “ Big fi sh
eat little fi sh ” was illustrated by Pieter Bruegel the elder in An extensive series of studies was published by Ken
1557, as an allegory of human greed. Until the late 19th Gold covering culture (Gold 1 968, 1970, 1971, 1973) ,
century, the base of the marine food chain (nourishing the coastal communities (1975, 1977), as well as anatomy
littlest fi sh) was thought to be matter supplied by river input and physiology (Gold 1 969a, b, 1979; Gold & Morales
and shallow water plants. Image of a lithograph version, 1975a, b , 1976a, b, c; Gold & Pollinger 1971 ). Gold ’ s
© Trustees of the British Museum .
Fig. 1.8 B y the end of the 19th century, planktonic organisms were recognized as the base of a complex food web supporting
exploited fi sh populations. The drawing by Hardy (1965) depicts the herring food web based on the relationships described in
his 1924 herring monograph. Note in the lower left a tintinnid. Figure adapted from Hardy (1965) .

Introduction to tintinnids 11
ern Canadian, Hedin (1976) in Sweden, Heinbokel
( 1977) in California, Rassoulzadegan ( 1975) in
France, Souto (1979) in Argentina, Damodara (1981)
in Southern India, Brownlee (1982) , Capriulo (1982) ,
and Verity ( 1984) in the northeast USA. During this
time extensive cytological investigations of tintinnids
were carried out (Hedin 1975a ; Laval 1971, 1972 ;
Laval - Peuto 1975, 1976a,b, 1977; 1981; 1983 ).
The period of the mid - 1970s to the mid - 1980s also
saw the development of our current view of the struc-
ture of planktonic ecosystems, a view that recognizes
the importance of picoplankton, both autrophic and
Publisher's Note:
heterotrophic. This period then included the proposi-
Image not available
tion of the “ microbial loop ” and the beginnings of the
in the electronic edition
modern fi eld of aquatic microbial ecology. The reas-
sessment of the structure of planktonic communities,
as distinct both qualitatively and quantitatively from a
linear view of primary producer to herbivore to fi sh,
was prompted by several discoveries (or re- d iscoveries),
as follows.
1. Both primary production and phytoplankton
biomass are dominated by small (< 20 μ m) cells in most
systems (as reviewed in Malone (1980) ).
2. Phytoplankton are a considerable direct source
of dissolved organic carbon, excreting a signifi cant
portion of the carbon fi xed through photosynthesis
(e.g., Sharp 1977 ; Sellner 1981 ).
3. The abundance of bacteria is high, much higher
Fig. 1.9 Trophic relations of microzooplankton after
Conover (1982) . Heavy arrows denote direct relations. (a) A than previously thought (revealed through the devel-
diatom. (b) An autotrophic nano- fl agellate. (c) A C eratium opment of direct- c ounting techniques using fl uores-
(dinofl agellate). (d) A gymnodinid dinofl agellate. (e) Single cent stains) and relatively invariant (i.e., Hobbie et al.
cells of autotrophic prokaryotes. (f) A dinophysid 1977 ).
dinofl agellate. (g) Clumped cells of autotrophic prokaryotes. 4. B acterioplankton are active with bacterial second-
(h) Single cells of heterotrophic prokaryotes. (i) Detrital ary production of the same order of magnitude as
particle with attached bacteria. (j) Heterotrophic
primary production in many systems (Fuhrman &
nanofl agellate. (k) Detrital particle. (l) Small chaetognath.
Azam 1980 ).
(m) Tintinnid ciliate. (n) Copepod nauplius. (o)
The conclusion that a substantial and active micro-
Appendicularian. (p) Copepod. (r) Ctenophore. (s) Large
bial community exists in the plankton was inescapable.
chaetognath. (t) Planktivorous fi sh. © Collection of Mus é e
Oc é anographique de Monaco, Fondation Albert Ier, Prince However, its structure was unclear. Field and labora-
de Monaco. tory experiments with tintinnids, taken as typical
microzooplankton, had shown high grazing rates on
laboratory investigations along with the further fi eld nanoplankton size prey (Heinbokel 1978a, b ; Hein-
studies of Beers & Stewart (1970, 1971) reiterated the bokel & Beers 1979 ; Rassoulzadegan 1978 , Rassoulza-
probable importance of microzooplankton, of which degan & Etienne 1 981; Stoecker et al. 1 981) . However,
tintinnids were an obvious component. Perhaps conse- there was little evidence that microzooplankton were
quently, between 1974 and 1984, worldwide at least major consumers of bacteria - sized organisms. In fact,
ten PhD theses specifi cally addressed the ecology of work with freshwater ciliates suggested that ciliates
tintinnids in planktonic ecosystems: Blackbourn typical of the marine microzooplankton were poor
( 1974) in northwest Canada, Johansen ( 1976) in east- candidates for the role of bacteriovores (Fenchel

12 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
1980a, b, c, d ). In contrast, studies of the feeding and
abundances of marine heterotrophic nanofl agellates
strongly supported their proposition as bacteriovores
(Fenchel 1982a, b, c, d ). There remained the need to
explain high bacterial abundances and growth rates.
Most of the pieces of the puzzle, perhaps fi rst noted
by Pomeroy (1974) , were put together with the propo-
sition of the microbial loop by Azam et al. in 1983 .
The “ loop ” was one of dissolved organic matter. It
is excreted by both autotrophic and heterotrophic
microbes as well as metazoan zooplankton and it sup-
ports bacterial production. Heterotrophic nanofl agel-
lates consume the bacterial production and grazing by
microzooplankton accounts for the production of het-
erotrophic nanofl agellates. A simplifi ed contemporary
view of the microbial loop in the plankton is shown
in Fig. 1.10 . Not shown in the fi gure are complexities
such as mixotrophy in the phytoplankton, parasitic
organisms (see Chapter 6 ), and the large variety of
predators known to feed on microzooplankton such as
tintinnids (see Chapter 5 ).
Not long after the formal proposition of the micro-
bial loop, the true complexities of the microbial com-
ponent of marine plankton became apparent. It was
found that across all microbial size - classes, taxonomic
affi nity was a very poor predictor of the basic trophic
attribute of autotroph, heterotroph, or mixotroph. The Fig. 1.10 Simplifi ed contemporary view of the microbial
existence of a complex microbial food web character- loop in the marine plankton and the microbial food web
ized by many connections among microbes of blurred based on the relationships described in Fenchel (1988) .
trophic roles (prokaryotic and eukaryotic alike), as well Dissolved organic matter (DOM) originates from a large pool
with higher trophic levels, was recognized (e.g., Sherr of organisms of diverse trophic levels, with fl ows shown as
& Sherr 1988 ). Attention was diverted from tintinnids the open lines, and is consumed by heterotrophic bacteria
(e). The “ viral shunt ” is the fl ow of DOM from bacteria
in part because there is, in reality, no “ typical ” micro-
themselves, lysed from viral infection, back into the DOM
zooplankter, and furthermore tintinnids are usually
pool. The solid arrows show predator – prey relations. Larval
but a minority component of the assemblage “ pro-
fi sh (a) eat copepods (b). Copepods eat large phytoplankton
tist microzooplankton ” (see Chapter 9 ). In addition,
(f) such as dinofl agellates and diatoms as well as small
research activity in plankton food - web dynamics microzooplankton such as tintinnids (c). The autotrophic
slowed somewhat throughout the 1990s. In the nanofl agellates (g), and the heterotrophic nanofl agellates
oceanographic community there was a clear shift in (d), are eaten by the microzooplankton. The heterotrophic
focus to prokaryote communities. The development of nanofl agellates feed on autotrophic bacteria (h), such as
molecular tools made prokaryotes much more amena- Synechococcus , as well heterotrophic bacteria. The “ microbial
ble to study (e.g., Sherr & Sherr 2008a ) and dissolved loop ” proper is the production of DOM, its fl ow to
heterotrophic bacteria transforming it into bacterial
organic matter, the substrate supporting heterotrophic
biomass, and the subsequent transfer of this bacterial
prokaryotes, was found to be a pool of carbon much
biomass up the food web through whose activities, in part,
more dynamic than previously thought (Hedges
supply the DOM pool thus closing the loop.
2002 ). In recent years most tintinnid studies have
focused on questions of diversity and distributions (e.g.
Fonda Umani et al. 2011 ; Sitran et al. 2009 ; Thomp-
son & Alder 2005 ) or taxonomy and phylogeny, notably
using a combiniation of both molecular and classic

Introduction to tintinnids 13
morphological data (e.g. Kim et al. 2010 ; Agatha & pared with most other groups of planktonic organisms,
Str ü der - Kypke 2007 , 2012 ; Santoferrara et al. 2012a , especially other planktonic protists, there exists a very
2012b ; Xu et al. 2012 ; Bachy et al. 2012), an approach substantial and relatively detailed literature, both
that appears especially valuable for tintinids (see Chap- modern and historical. Tintinnids are a phylogeneti-
ters 2 and 3 ). cally coherent group (e.g., Lynn 2008 ) of morpho-
logically and ecologically similar species (e.g., Dolan
2010 ). Thus, they are the ideal group of planktonic
1.5 TINTINNIDS AS MODEL ORGANISMS organisms to examine questions of variability in time,
FOR MARINE PLANKTON space, and composition.
Tintinnid ciliates most likely originated in the marine
Hutchinson posed the question, “ How can so many plankton from a shell - less, oligotrich - like ciliate (see
species co - exist in a relatively homogenous environ- Chapter 3 ). Tintinnids are often attributed one of the
ment?” ; his “ Paradox of the Plankton ” is now over 50 most extensive and continuous fossil records for
years old (Hutchinson 1961 ). So far, no explanation, zooplanktonic organisms, dating back to the Ordovi-
including his own, has been generally accepted and cian period (Fig. 1.11 ). Fossils resembling tintinnid
new mechanisms continue to be proposed (e.g., loricae have been described as fossil tintinnid species
Shoresh et al. 2008 ; Fox et al. 2010 ). Furthermore, the and continue today to be described as tintinnids
diversity Hutchinson described was based on observa- (see, for example, Bignot & Poignant 2010 ). Thus,
tions of morphologically defi ned species and this diver- in principle, tintinnids are good model organisms for
sity is now known to be dwarfed by the genetic diversity reconstructing paleo - environments. Unfortunately,
revealed by sequencing the DNA of natural plankton the fossil record of tintinnids is, in reality, ambiguous.
communities. Genetic data suggests that thousands of This is because many fossil remains reported to be tin-
species of protists can be found in a few liters of sea- tinnids, for example calpionellids, most likely are not
water (see, for example, Edgcomb et al. 2011 ). Such an (see Chapter 8 ). The fossil loricae of calpionellids are
astounding diversity is diffi cult to explain. Complicat- formed of calcite and as no known ciliates form exter-
ing any attempt is the fact that for most species - rich nal structures of calcite, calpionellids were probably
groups of planktonic organisms, phylogeny, morphol-
ogy, and ecology are not easily related to one another.
For example, harpacticoid copepods include both
planktonic and benthic species, forms that are herbivo-
rous, others that are carnivorous, or still others that
are parasitic. Similarly, gymnodinid dinofl agellates can
be benthic, planktonic, phototrophic, mixotrophic, het-
erotrophic, or parasitic. In contrast to such taxa, tintin-
nid ciliates represent a singular exception of a coherent
group of organisms.
Tintinnid ciliates constitute a single suborder of the
ciliate order Choreotrichidae and are thus phyloge-
netically united. In terms of morphology, all are char-
acterized by the possession of a shell (lorica) whose
architecture forms the basis of classic taxonomic
schemes. In this species - rich group (over 1000 mor-
photypes have been described, see Chapter 3 ), virtually
all are restricted to the marine plankton. A few species
are known from freshwater plankton, but no tintinnids
Fig. 1.11 The fossil record of major zooplankton taxa
are benthic. In marine plankton assemblages they are
according to Rigby and Milsom (2000) . The record
ubiquitous and the great majority are consumers of
attributed to tintinnids is typically one of the oldest among
nanoplankton, including the smaller size- f ractions of contemporary taxa of the plankton. However, many fossils
phytoplankton. Distinct species have long been distin- described as tintinnids probably are not (see Chapter 8 ).
guished using light microscopy. Consequently, com- Based on data from Rigby & Milsom (2000) .

14 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Tintinnids are probably the group of planktonic pro-
tists with best potential for analysis using automated or
semi - automated imaging systems. They are relatively
large and the geometry of the lorica is simple. Further-
more, some characteristics of the simple geometry, spe-
cifi cally the diameter of the lorica oral opening, is both
of taxonomic signifi cance in distinguishing species (see
Laval - Peuto & Brownlee 1986 ) and correlates with
some ecological characteristics, such as prey size (Fig.
1.13 ) or maximum growth rate (see Chapter 4 ). Among
tintinnids, morphological diversity is correlated with
species diversity and morphological differences refl ect
ecological differences. Therefore, data in the simple
form of morphological descriptors can provide informa-
tion on species diversity and ecological characteristics
in tintinnids. Unfortunately, existing imaging systems
are not suitable for analyzing most natural assemblages
in their entirety. The size range of tintinnid loricae (50 –
400 μ m length, 15 – 200 μ m diameter) is incompatible
with either the size range or resolving capacity of exist-
ing instruments such as the Flowcam (e.g., Zarauz et al.
2009 ) or the ZooScan (e.g., Gorsky et al. 2010 ).
Fig. 1.12 A lorica of D icytocysta lepida from a section of a
However, the near future, like the recent past, will likely
sediment core dated to 3000 – 6000 years before present.
see great progress in instruments for analyzing plank-
Sediment core samples from the Orca Basin (2249 m depth)
ton populations (see Erickson et al. 2011 ).
of the Gulf of Mexico contained tintinnid loricae and
crustacean remains in the section corresponding to Although studying tintinnids may not provide a
89 – 92 cm depth in the core. Reprinted from Earth and general explanation for “ the paradox of the plankton ” ,
Plantary Science Letters, 272, Meckler, A.N., Schubert, C.J., any attempt to explain the paradox will have to account
Hochuli, P.A., Plessen, B., Birgel, D., Flower, B.P., Hinrichs, for co - existence of dozens of tintinnid species, all of
K.-U. & Haug, G.H. Glacial to Holocene terrigenous organic roughly similar morphology and ecology, in a few liters
matter input to sediments from Orca Basin, Gulf of Mexico. of seawater. Does the answer lie in the partitioning of
A combined optical and biomarker approach, 251 – 263.
food resources among tintinnid species, variability in
Copyright (2008) with permission from Elsevier.
competition from other microzooplankters, differential
mortality, or life - cycle differences among species? The
not even ciliates, much less tintinnids (Remane 1963, question of what regulates or rules the composition
1998 ). Some authorities then attribute a fossil record of assemblages of tintinnids is part of the question of
to tintinnids which begins only in early Jurassic period what regulates planktonic assemblages. This question
(e.g., Armstrong & Brasier 2005 ). is far from trivial or only of academic interest. Predict-
Although the fossil record is unsettled, it is clear that ing the consequences of climate change on marine
the remains of tintinnids can provide evidence of rela- systems requires an understanding the functioning of
tively recent climatic change. Very well preserved lorica planktonic food webs, which in turn requires an under-
have been found in late Holocene deposits (Fig. 1.12) . standing of what regulates their composition.
Loricae are among the microfossils that can be used as As a concluding note, it is worth noting that outside
indicators of ecological and hydrographic shifts. For the realm of science, tintinnids can be considered as
example, changes in an Antarctic lake were inferred models. In the art world, tintinnids have appeared as
using the sediment record of tintinnids and other both models of artistic form in nature as well as sub-
planktonic organisms by Cromer et al. (2005) . Like- jects. The best known are perhaps those in Haeckel ’ s
wise paleo - hydrographic changes in waters surround- “ Art Forms of Nature” seen in Plate 3, Ciliata (Haeckel
ing the Faroe Islands were investigated by analyzing the 1904 ). Several of the species shown are from the
occurrences of dinofl agellate cysts, acritarchs, and tin- plates of his 1873 paper describing forms he found
tinnid loricae in sediment cores (Roncaglia 2004 ). in the Canary Islands and Naples (Fig. and Plate 1.14 ).

Fig. 1.13 The size range of the food items ingested by three tintinnid species ((a) H elicostomella subulata , (b) Eutintinnus
pectinus , (c) Favella ehrenbergii ) in Danish coastal waters varies with the size of the oral diameters of the loricae. Based on data
from Fenchel (1987) , fi g. 7.1 .
Fig. 1.14 Tintinnids of Ernst Haeckel. Restored drawings from Ernst Haeckel ’ s 1873 paper, the fi rst scientifi c article devoted
to tintinnid ciliates. Image by J.R. Dolan. For color version, see Plate 1.14 .

16 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
A recent example of tintinnids in the art world is
in Mara Haseltine ’ s sculpture “ La Boheme ” , which
depicts tintinnids entangled in microscopic pieces of
ultraviolet - degraded plastic (Fig. and Plate 1.15 ).
1.6 KEY POINTS
1. Tintinnids are ciliate protists, constituting a subor-
der of the order Choreotrichidae, with the common
characteristic of having a lorica. They are all plank-
tonic and the overwhelming majority are marine.
Based on differences in lorica architecture, literally
hundreds of species have been described since the fi rst
tintinnid was noted over 230 years ago.
2. The role of tintinnids in the pelagic ecosystems is
that of a component of the microzooplankton, grazers
at the base of the food web. They are a species - rich
group of organisms which are ecologically united as
planktonic ciliates, mainly consumers of nanoplank-
ton, and are morphologically as well as phylogeneti-
cally united as “ shelled ” , choreotrich ciliates.
3. Tintinnid ciliates represent an excellent group of
organisms to examine questions of what regulates or
rules the composition of planktonic assemblages.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Fig. 1.15 “ La Boheme: A Portrait of Today ’ s Oceans in
The comments and ideas of all the chapter authors as
Peril ” , the 2012 sculpture by Mara G. Haseltine depicts two
well as Richard Christan, Tom Fenchel, Dave Kirch-
tintinnids ensnarled in plastic. Dimensions:
man, Charles Bachy, and Puri Lopez - Garcia are grate-
91 cm × 122 cm × 185 cm (length × width × height).
fully acknowledged. Funding for this work was provided
Materials: uranium - infused blown glass and plastic.
By permission of Mara Heseltine. For color version, by the French Agence National de la Recherche and
see Plate 1.15 . Pole Mer PACA through the ANR - Biodiversit é AQUA-
PARADOX project.

Chapter 2
The Tintinnid Lorica
Sabine Agatha1 , Mich è le Laval - Peuto2 ,
and Paul Simon3
1 University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria
2 Chemin des Campons 144, La Colle - sur - Loup, France
3 Max Planck Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids, Dresden, Germany
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
17

18 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
2.1 INTRODUCTION unicellular organisms (Figs 1.4 , 1.5 , 2.1 , 2.2 , 3.16 ,
and 3.17 ).
Tintinnids are unique among planktonic ciliates in B ecause our knowledge about the inhabitants is
building solid shells. These shells, called loricae (singu- rather scarce, the taxonomic classifi cation of the tin-
lar lorica; Latin, “ c orselet” ) , are minute works of art. tinnids is still commonly based on features of the
Sometimes they are simply tube- or vase- s haped, some- loricae (Chapter 3 ) . Therefore, we should look closely
times incredibly elaborate, but the builders are only at the factors that infl uence the appearance of the
Publisher's Note: Publisher's Note: Publisher's Note:
Image not available Image not available Image not available
in the electronic edition in the electronic edition in the electronic edition
Fig. 2.1 Hyaline loricae (a – e), a hard, agglomerated lorica (f), loricae composed of a hyaline collar and an agglomerated
bowl (g, h), and soft, agglomerated loricae (i, j) in the scanning electron microscope (a – e, g, originals of S. Agatha; f, adapted
from Agatha 2010b ; h, adapted from Agatha, S. & Tsai, S. (2008) Redescription of the tintinnid S tenosemella pacifi ca Kofoid
and Campbell, 1929 (Ciliophora, Spirotricha) based on live observation, protargol impregnation, and scanning electron
microscopy. Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, 55, 75 – 85; i, j, adapted from Foissner et al. 1999 ). (a) D adayiella ganymedes .
(b)Steenstrupiella species. (c) E utintinnus brandti . (d) R habdonella spiralis . (e) C limacocylis elongata . (f) T intinnopsis parvula . (g)
Codonellopsis schabi . (h) S tenosemella pacifi ca . (i, j) T intinnopsis cylindrata . The empty lorica in Fig. 2.1 i collapsed in the scanning
electron microscope, as it is soft. Scale bars 50 μ m (a, b), 100 μ m (c), 150 μ m (d, e), 20 μ m (f), 50 μ m (g, i, j), and 30 μ m (h).

The tintinnid lorica 19
Fig. 2.2 Lorica of A canthostomella species covered with coccoliths (a; calcium carbonate plates formed by coccolithophorids,
unicellular algae) and specimens of D ictyocysta mitra (b), D. lepida (d), and C odonella aspera (c) showing a lorica sac. Arrowhead
in Figure 2.2 d denotes tentaculoids (pin - shaped cytoplasmic extensions containing tintinnid extrusomes). Micrographs from
the scanning electron microscope (a – c; a, adapted from Young & Geisen 2002 ; b, c, adapted from Agatha, S. (2010a) A Light
and scanning electron microscopic study of the closing apparatus in tintinnid ciliates (Ciliophora, Spirotricha, Tintinnina): a
forgotten synapomorphy. Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, 57, 297 – 307) and a live cell (d; adapted from Agatha 2010a ).
LS, lorica sac. Scale bars 10 μ m (a) and 20 μ m (b – d) .
loricae, which are (1) the amount and quality of Just after division and before it starts the construc-
the lorica material, (2) the environmental conditions tion of its own lorica, the proter (anterior division
during formation, and (3) the cell cycle. Astonish- product) is naked, whereas the opisthe (posterior divi-
ingly, many of these unicellular organisms are able to sion product) keeps the old lorica. Tintinnids that lost
construct not only a single type of lorica, but several, or abandoned their loricae are also naked, until they
which are occasionally so dissimilar that they were form new loricae. Reports of naked tintinnids from the
affi liated with different families. After the death of the plankton are not available, probably because the lorica
ciliate or when the lorica is abandoned, it sediments, formation is generally a rapid process. An occasional
transporting chemical compounds to deeper water misidentifi cation with aloricate choreotrichids of the
layers and possibly to the bottom of the sea or lake. genus S trombidinopsis can also not be ruled out, con-
As tintinnids occasionally dominate the microzoo- sidering that usually fi xed material was investigated.
plankton (heterotrophic organisms of the pelagic Furthermore, naked tintinnids are slow swimming,
zone 20 – 200 μ m in size), the material fl ux can be relatively small cells that could easily be caught by
considerable. numerous predators. In cultures, however, naked tin-
tinnids can be observed.
According to the famous monographs on extant
2.2 DIVERSITY, FORMATION, (non - fossil) tintinnids by Kofoid & Campbell (1929,
AND VARIABILITY OF LORICAE 1939) , the vast majority of genera have hyaline loricae
(42 genera in 10 families), which are remarkably
Diversity of loricae diverse in morphology (Figs 1.5 and 2.1a – e). The
loricae range from small, smooth, and rounded forms
The loricae are often much longer than the cell proper resembling bowls (e.g., in Undella and Proplectella ) and
(Figs 1.4 , 1.5 , and 2.10) and they are thus able to tube - shaped loricae (e.g., in E utintinnus ) to large bowls
harbor the entire disturbed ciliate retracted by its con- with everted collars (e.g., in Petalotricha ; Fig. 2.4 ) and
tractile peduncle. In extended state, the anterior cell chalice - shaped loricae (e.g., in E piplocylis ). The ante-
portion with the adoral membranelles (fan - like ciliary rior lorica portions can be quite elaborate with den-
structures used for swimming and feeding; Chapter 4 ) ticulations, fl aring collars, and portions of different
protrudes from the lorica. The lorica might be a protec- structure or sculptured appearance (Figs 2.1 and 2.2 ).
tion against the numerous predators (mainly copepods The second major type of lorica is hard and has entirely,
and invertebrate larvae), but other functions are also or only in the posterior portion, particles of mineral or
possible (Chapter 1) . biogenic origin agglomerated. These loricae are found

20 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 2.3 Transmission electron micrographs of lorica forming granules. (a) Morula - like aggregate of granules in P etalotricha
ampulla (adapted from Laval - Peuto 1994 ); similar structures occur in C ymatocylis convallaria , Cyttarocylis brandti , and
Parafavella denticulata . (b, c) Granular and compact types of granules in P arafavella gigantea (adapted from Hedin 1975b ). Scale
bars 2 μ m (a) and 1 μ m (b, c) .
in 11 genera belonging to four families (Figs 1.4 , diaphragm - like and occurs in the genera Salpingacan-
2.1 f – j, 2.2 a, c, d, and 2.12 ). A few agglomerated tha and Salpingella (Tintinnidae; with hyaline loricae).
species have soft loricae; they belong to the family Tin- Because the diaphragm - like closing apparatus shows
tinnidiidae, which comprises three genera. neither folds nor closing movements and is not associ-
A unique character, the closing apparatus, was ated with a lorica sac, a homology with the foldable
recently re - investigated, using light and scanning elec- apparatus is less likely. Therefore, the genera S alpinga-
tron microscopy (Agatha 2010a ). The fi rst observa- cantha and S alpingella are probably not closely related
tions on this structure were performed about 130 years to the four genera mentioned above. This is supported
ago by Fol (1 883 ; for details, see Agatha 2010a ). Two by phylogenetic analysis of the small subunit ribo-
kinds of closing apparatus exist. A membranous somal RNA (SSU rRNA) gene (Chapter 3 ).
closing apparatus, which shuts the lorica opening by Because hyaline loricae lack agglomerated particles
8 – 24 folds, usually 12, in disturbed and thus retracted obscuring their content and texture (see below), those
ciliates, is found in four genera, which were until tintinnids were preferentially studied. Even with a
recently affi liated with three families (Chapter 3 ; Fig. very simple microscope at low magnifi cation, M ü ller
2.2 b – d): Codonella , Codonaria (hard, agglomerated (1779) was able to observe the ciliate, the contractility
loricae), Codonellopsis (loricae composed of a hyaline of its peduncle, and some stages of cell division (see
collar and an agglomerated bowl), and Dictyocysta Box 1.1 in Chapter 1 ). To avoid impediments by the
(loricae entirely hyaline or composed of a hyaline agglomerated particles, the fi rst sections of tintinnid
collar and an agglomerated bowl). Owing to a similar cells to study the cell structures were mainly con-
morphology and functionality, the foldable closing ducted in species with hyaline loricae (Entz Jr 1 909b ;
apparatus was regarded as synapomorphy (shared Merkle 1909 ). Differences in the structure of the
derived character) of these genera (Chapter 3 ). This lorica wall and sometimes its texture were described,
kind of closing apparatus merges posteriorly into a using light microscopy (Brandt 1906, 1907 ). Later,
lorica sac, which is diffi cult to recognize as it com- ultrathin sections for transmission electron micros-
pletely lines the lorica bowl (broadened lorica portion). copy provided new data on the cytology of tintinnids
Even if not hermetically sealed, the lorica sac and its and the texture of the lorica wall (Laval 1972 ; Laval -
closing apparatus might be a valuable protection Peuto 1975, 1980 ). Several types of texture are
against contact predators, who use feeding tubes (dino- distinguishable (Figs 2.13 and 2.14 ): monolaminar
fl agellates) and pseudopodia (radiolaria), especially, and compact (e.g., in Eutintinnus ), monolaminar with
in tintinnids with fenestrated loricae, for example alveoli (small chambers; e.g., in Climacocylis ), trilami-
Dictyocysta . The second type of closing apparatus is nar with different tubules in the three layers (e.g., in

The tintinnid lorica 21
Petalo tricha ), or monolaminar and tubular (e.g., in D ic- somatic ciliature (assemblage of body cilia; Fig. 1.2 ;
tyocysta ). The lorica wall can have windows (e.g., in Chapter 3 ). The latter apparently moulds the secreted
Codonellopsis , Dictyocysta , and Stenosemella ; Figs 2.1 g, lorica material, as soon as it is extruded; only large
h and 2.2 b, d), perforations of different sizes (e.g., in quantities of lorica material allow a rapid and complete
Epiplocylis and Cyttarocylis ), or pores (e.g., in R hab- construction of a lorica. The behavior and division rate
donella and Schmidingerella ; Figs 2.14 c and 3.17e ). The of the species (Chapter 4 ) and the environmental con-
outer lorica surface may show reticulate, longitudinal, ditions (e.g., temperature, salinity, and particle availa-
or spiraled ribs or folds (e.g., in Climacocylis , Daturella , bility) during the construction probably infl uence the
Rhabdonella , and S chmidingerella ; Figs 2.1 d, e , 2.14 a, fi nal size, shape, and structure of the lorica. Therefore,
c, and 3.17e ). Furthermore, the wall can have a the fi nal morphology of a lorica refl ects the history of
spiraled structure in most of the lorica (e.g., in Clima- its construction.
cocylis ; Fig. 2.1 e) or only in the collar (e.g., in C odonel-
lopsis ; Fig. 2.1g ).
The texture of the lorica wall is distinguished from Lorica material
the lorica structure (for details, see Laval - Peuto &
Brownlee 1986 ; Laval - Peuto 1994 ). Continuous and The lorica material is an organic substance produced
spiraled lorica walls are occasionally found in the same by the ciliate mainly before cell division. The fi rst
species. They are the result of different construction detailed observations of this material were probably
modes. The wall texture, however, depends on the from Campbell (1927) , who named the cytoplasmic
chemical composition of the lorica material. Despite state “ lorica forming granules ” . Transmission electron
some variability in the height of the surface ridges and microscopic studies revealed the existence of differ-
the abundance of pores, the wall texture appears invar- ent types of osmiophilic granule and arrangement:
iably monolaminar with alveoli in S chmidingerella morula - like bodies composed of densely packed gran-
arcuata (compare Fig. 2.7 a with 3.17). Likewise, the ules inCymatocylis , C yttarocylis , and P etalotricha (Fig.
monolaminar texture with alveoli is apparently con- 2.3 a; Laval 1972 ; Laval - Peuto 1975, 1994 ; Wasik &
stant during the cell cycle of Favella ehrenbergii and F . Miko ł ajczyk 1992 ); single granular and compact types
panamensis (Laval - Peuto 1981 ; S. Agatha, unpublished in Parafavella (Fig. 2.3 b, c; Hedin 1 975b ) and T intin-
observations). Therefore, the wall texture seems to be nopsis (Laval - Peuto et al. 1 979 ); single granules
a rather reliable taxonomic character. Accordingly, the 1 – 1.5 μ m across in Favella ehrenbergii ; and an aggre-
trilaminar texture of the lorica wall with a tubular gate of granules, forming a single mass in D ictyocysta
middle layer in Cyttarocylis and Petalotricha indicates a (Laval - Peuto 1 994 ). Even within a single genus, differ-
close relationship, contradicting their current classifi - ent granule types were recorded, namely granular
cation in different families. and compact types inParafavella gigantea (Fig. 2.3 b, c;
Hedin 1975b ), whereas there are morula - like aggre-
gates in P . denticulata (Sokolova & Gerassimova 1984 ;
General aspects of lorica formation Sokolova et al. 1986 ); possibly, the fi rst two types rep-
resent only developmental stages. The different mor-
Tintinnids can create new loricae on different occa- phologies of the granules likely refl ect distinct chemical
sions. After each cell division, the proter forms a new compositions and might be correlated with the fi nal
lorica, whereas the opisthe keeps the old one, which texture of the lorica wall. Possibly, the lorica material
might be slightly modifi ed during its trophic life. If the is differentiated and stored without any limiting mem-
lorica is lost or abandoned by the ciliate, a new one is brane inside the vesicular reticulum, cortical cavities
built that might be different from the preceding one. that communicate with each other and the pericellular
So, the same species possibly displays different forms space underneath the perilemma (an additional mem-
(phenotypes) of loricae. As damaged, deformed, or brane covering the entire cell; Laval - Peuto 1975 ;
excessively modifi ed loricae are very rarely found in Sokolova & Gerassimova 1984 ; Sokolova et al. 1986 ).
plankton samples, it seems likely that loricae are The process of granule accumulation was studied in
usually not older than two or three cell divisions. live specimens with hyaline loricae (Faur é - Fremiet
Two conditions are required for lorica construction: 1924 ), for example in P etalotricha (Fig. 2.4 ), and
the presence of lorica material and the activity of the described after application of various histological

22 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 2.4 Trophont (a) and dividers (b – d) of
Petalotricha ampulla (live cells; originals of M.
Laval - Peuto). (a) Very young trophont in its
newly formed lorica. It possesses only few
lorica forming granules. (b) Older trophont
with some recently formed refractile granules
in the posterior cell portion (stage II in Fig.
2.5 ). The opisthe ’ s future oral apparatus
starts to originate. (c) In the middle division
stage, the already abundant granules are
found in almost the whole cell (stage III in
Fig. 2.5 ). (d) Just before separation, the
granules accumulate in the anterior cell
portion above the opisthe ’ s future oral
apparatus, namely in the proter (stage IV in
Fig. 2.5 ). AZM, adoral zone of membranelles;
L, lorica; LFG, lorica forming granules; OP,
oral primordium. Scale bars 100 μ m.
stains (Campbell 1927 ; Biernacka 1965 ). In particu- portion at the level of the somatic ciliature (Fig. 2.6 ).
lar, the detailed observations of a F avella species stained First, the posterior lorica portion including posterior
with protargol (which reveals the basal bodies, macro- processes is formed by the mergence of the material
nucleus nodules, and micronuclei) demonstrated this globules with those secreted before. Then, the lorica
process during morphogenesis (reproduction of the grows anteriorly by attaching a band of lorica material
pre - existing form during cell division; Fig. 2.5 ; Laval - to the opening rim (Fig. 2.7 ).
Peuto 1994) . The lorica granules gradually increase in In tintinnids, locomotion is provided by the adoral
number in the posterior portion of the ciliate during zone of membranelles, specifi cally by the large collar
the early division stages (stages II and III). During membranelles inserting on the elevated peristomial
completion of the opisthe ’ s oral ciliature, the granules rim around the circular peristomial fi eld (Fig. 1 .2;
migrate into the anterior cell half, namely into the Chapter 4 ). Swimming is a permanent activity of
future proter (stage IV). With the separation of the two these planktonic ciliates. Even, when they divide or
division products, the opisthe is provided with the new conjugate, the membranellar movements only stop
oral apparatus and keeps the old lorica, whereas the for a short period. Just before separation of the divi-
naked proter with the old oral apparatus is equipped sion products, the opisthe moves to the lorica
with a suffi cient number of granules for the rapid and opening and pushes the proter outside. Still con-
complete formation of a new lorica. nected by a thin cytoplasmic thread, the opisthe
The secretion of the lorica material by the proter was directs the locomotion by its vigorously beating
studied in live F avella specimens by Laval - Peuto (1981) . adoral membranelles, while the proter with the origi-
Her fi ndings are supported by scanning electron micro- nal adoral zone of membranelles swims actively, but
graphs (Figs 2.6 and 2.7 ), which show just extruded not in phase with the opisthe (Fig. 2.10 a – d; Laval -
globules of lorica material in the anterior ventral cell Peuto 1981 ).

The tintinnid lorica 23
Fig. 2.5 Morphogenesis of a F avella species
that probably belongs to the recently
established genus S chmidingerella [Chapter 3 ;
adapted from Laval - Peuto (1994) ; after
protargol staining]. The production of the
lorica forming granules occurs during all
stages; however, lorica formation depletes the
material reserve. Stage I: fi rst signs of the oral
primordium (for details on the somatic ciliary
pattern and its development, see Chapter 3 ).
Stage II: the adoral membranelles start to
form, and replication bands traverse the
macronucleus nodules. Stage III: the lorica
forming granules become numerous and
migrate anteriorly above the oral primordium.
Stage IV: the macronucleus nodules fuse
before division. Now, most of the granules are
in the anterior cell portion. After fi ssion, the
opisthe receives the new adoral zone of
membranelles and keeps the old lorica,
whereas the naked proter with the old adoral
zone and the reserve of granules swims away
and starts the construction of a new lorica
(Fig. 2.10 a– d). AZM, adoral zone of
membranelles; L, lorica; LA, lateral ciliary
fi eld; LF, left ciliary fi eld; LFG, lorica forming
granules; MA, macronucleus nodules; MAf,
fused macronucleus nodules; OP, oral
primordium; RB, replication bands (place of
DNA duplication) ; RF, right ciliary fi eld; VK,
ventral kinety.
Role of the somatic cilia while swimming (Faur é - Fremiet 1924 ). In T intinnopsis
(Fig. 1.2 ), S tenosemella , Codonella , and Codonellopsis ,
The somatic ciliature, except for the anteriormost, especially, the elongated anteriormost cilia contribute
often elongated cilia, is hidden by the lorica. As in the to the lorica formation by carrying foreign particles
related oligotrichids and aloricate choreotrichids, the to the newly forming lorica portions (Faur é - Fremiet
somatic cilia of tintinnids are not involved in locomo- 1924 ; Hofker 1931a ). However, a correlation between
tion, but their arrangement in specialized fi elds and the somatic ciliary pattern and the lorica structure is
rows indicates other functions. Laval - Peuto & Brown- not evident (Chapter 3 ).
lee (1986) suggested a role in (1) the construction
of the lorica (Hofker 1 931a) , (2) the general mainte-
nance and cleaning of the interior space (e.g., the Lorica phenotypes formed
removal of faeces from the lorica; Entz Jr 1909b ), (3) during the cell cycle
the positioning of the ciliate within the lorica, and (4)
sensory activities. Live observations on the movement The phenotypic plasticity of the loricae can only be
of the somatic cilia are rare. In Eutintinnus , with its demonstrated in cultured species by following several
hyaline lorica, the elongated anteriormost cilia are generations or gene - based diagnosis. The fi rst culture
rather immobile, grasping the upper rim of the lorica studies provided interesting, but brief and incomplete,

24 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 2.6 Lorica formation in F avella panamensis from fi eld material (scanning electron micrographs; originals of S. Agatha).
(a) Oblique posterior polar view. The globules of lorica material are apparently arranged in a single oblique stripe on the
ciliated anterior ventral cell portion (arrow), while the material already forms an obconical cap covering the whole unciliated
posterior portion. This indicates that the lorica material is extruded in the anterior cell portion and transported to the growing
lorica margin by ciliary movements. (b) Detail showing the mergence of the material globules and an underpinning network,
which might represent the fi rst stage in the merging process. L, just forming lorica. Scale bars 30 μ m (a) and 5 μ m (b).
observations of species with hyaline or translucent The fi rst comprehensive study was conducted by
loricae (Entz Sr 1885 ; Schweyer 1905, 1909 ; Entz Jr Laval - Peuto (1981) on cultures of F avella ehrenbergii .
1909b ; Busch 1 925 ). They suggested the existence of She demonstrated that a single species is able to
distinct stages in lorica construction and a certain vari- produce a variety of lorica morphologies during its cell
ability in lorica morphology. Unfortunately, Kofoid & cycle and that tintinnid behavior during lorica forma-
Campbell (1929) neglected these studies and elevated tion is highly complex (Fig. 2.8 ). In addition, biometric
many lorica variants to species rank. Findings on pre- analyses of loricae from natural populations verifi ed
served samples from natural populations also indicated that the diameter of the lorica opening, specifi cally,
an intraspecifi c variability in lorica morphology (e.g., the internal diameter (correlates with the diameter
Davis 1978, 1981 ). For several decades, only the inves- of the adoral zone of membranelles) is the only reliable
tigations by Hofker (1931a, b) and Biernacka (1952, lorica feature for identifi cation. This was confi rmed by
1965) gave some insight into lorica formation, describ- conjugants (specimens performing a reciprocal fertili-
ing briefl y the early stages passed by the proter in the zation) with different lorica morphologies, but similar
genus Tintinnopsis . lorica opening diameters (Laval - Peuto 1983 ).

The tintinnid lorica 25
Fig. 2.7 Formation of an abnormal (posteriorly truncate) lorica in S chmidingerella arcuata from fi eld material (scanning
electron micrographs; originals of S. Agatha). (a) Lateral view showing the ciliate with a band of just secreted lorica material
(arrowhead). It is uncertain whether the band was detached from the lorica rim by movements of the cell during the
preparation procedure or is attached to the lorica rim only after reaching a certain length. (b) Detail showing the band of just
secreted globules of lorica material (arrowhead). (c) Detail showing the recently secreted globules of lorica material
(arrowhead) that started to merge with the already existing lorica portion (arrow). CM, collar membranelles; L, lorica. Scale
bars 50 μ m (a) and 5 μ m (b, c).
Laval - Peuto & Brownlee (1986) introduced a termi- the anterior end of a protolorica or paralorica; it is a
nology for the different types of lorica formed during a kind of collar and often spiraled. Several successive epi-
cell cycle (Fig. 2.9 ), as follows. (1) Protolorica (Greek loricae are possible.
prefi x protos , fi rst). The fi rst lorica built by the naked
proter just after division, using an intracellular reserve
of lorica material. (2) Paralorica (Greek prefi x p ara , Variability of loricae during the cell cycle
beside). The replacement lorica built by a naked tro- in hyaline species
phont, which has lost or abandoned its lorica; it might
be of coxliella form (Fig. 2 .8 ). ( 3 ) Epilorica (Greek prefi x The occurrence of different lorica phenotypes in cul-
epi , upon). The part secondarily added by a trophont to tures or natural populations depends on the conditions

26 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 2.8 Main lorica phenotypes formed by F avella ehrenbergii during two cell cycles (adapted from Laval - Peuto 1981 ). The
protolorica is rapidly built by the proter just after cell division, using the reserve of lorica material; the f avella form is the
common phenotype, whereas the d ecipiens form and other types (abnormalities) are rarer. The opisthe keeps the old lorica. A
paralorica is produced by a trophont which lost or abandoned its lorica; the c oxliella form, slowly built, is an entirely spiraled
phenotype. Epiloricae are one or more spiraled collars that are added to any phenotypes during the trophic life. In all
phenotypes, the length depends on the amount of available lorica material, whereas their spiraled structure is caused by a
slow secretion of the material. LFG, lorica forming granules.
encountered by the ciliate during its cell cycle, specifi - is continuous and hyaline in the favella form of Favella
cally during the construction of the protolorica and ehrenbergii , F . markusovszkyi , F . adriatica , and F. pana-
paralorica and the addition of one or more epiloricae mensis representing the most common phenotype in
(Figs 2.10 and 2.11 ). The most detailed studies were natural populations (Figs 2.8 , 2.10 e, f, and 3.16a , c).
preformed on Favella by Laval - Peuto (1981, 1983, Protoloricae of the f avella form are constructed
1994) . within 2 – 10 minutes. The process apparently stops
The length of the constructed lorica depends on the when the stored lorica material is used up. Abnormally
amount of lorica material available. Accordingly, the short and deformed loricae may come from a shortage
bowl and posterior process might be more or less long, of material and its reduced plasticity. This is shown by
and the posterior process and lorica closure might even ciliates that lose part of their lorica material owing
be lacking. Although the wall texture is invariable, the to the adverse conditions under the light microscope;
structure of the protolorica wall might vary. The wall they are unable to complete lorica construction, pro-

The tintinnid lorica 27
Fig. 2.9 Various phenotypes of loricae built by tintinnids after division (A) and during their trophic life (B; adapted from
Laval - Peuto & Brownlee 1986 ). I F avella ehrenbergii ; II T intinnopsis campanula ; III Helicostomella subulata ; IV Parafavella
denticulata . (a – c) The most common protoloricae; (d) abnormalities; (e) protoloricae with successively added epiloricae (E1, E2)
or “ collars ” ; (f) paraloricae (c oxliella form); (g) paraloricae with added epiloricae. Some of the phenotypes were considered
distinct species until their cell cycles were known, e.g., C oxliella decipiens (I b, c), C oxliella annulata (I f), and T intinnopsis
b ü tschlii (II b).
ducing ring - shaped loricae, which are promptly aban- form is translucent and irregular because of both the
doned (Fig. 2.10 j, k). compaction of its texture and its spiraled structure. In
The decipiens form is named after Coxliella decipiens , nature, the decipiens form is probably caused by less
which represents a further, less common lorica pheno- abundant and more viscous lorica material and certain
type in the cell cycle of Favella ehrenbergii (Figs 2.8 and environmental conditions; in the laboratory, it might
2.10 l – o). It is generally shorter than the f avella form be the result of elevated temperatures under the light
and has a stout twisted horn. The wall of the d ecipiens microscope.

28 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 2.10 Phenotypes produced by F avella ehrenbergii during the cell cycle (live cultured specimens; adapted from Laval - Peuto
1981 ). (a– d ) Very late dividers (a – c) and postdividers (d). The arrowhead denotes the reserve of lorica material used by the
proter to build a new lorica. (e, f) Protoloricae of f avella form showing the variability in length. (g – i) Protoloricae of f avella
form with epiloricae of different length. Cultured specimen (i) shows exceptionally long epilorica not known from plankton
samples. (j, k) Abnormal ring - shaped protoloricae. (l – o) Protoloricae of d ecipiens form showing the variability in length (l – n)
and form of the posterior end (o). P, peduncle. Scale bars 100 μ m (a – d, g – i, l – o), 200 μ m (e, f), and 50 μ m (j, k) .
Besides the two types of protoloricae, a third distinct helical wall structure. The paralorica is again hyaline
lorica phenotype is produced by F. ehrenbergii , namely and usually closed posteriorly, but it lacks a posterior
a paralorica of c oxliella form; the name refers to C ox- process. It is quite similar in length and opening diam-
liella annulata (Fig. 2.11 ). The construction of this eter to the bowls of the protoloricae. The same is true
replacement lorica can only occur when the granules for thecoxliella form of F avella panamensis (Fig. 3.16g ).
of lorica material are being formed (perhaps only Brandt (1907) and Entz Jr (1909b) already assumed
during the second part of the vegetative period). In that loricae of the c oxliella form are part of the cell
contrast to the rapid production of the protoloricae, cycle in Favella ehrenbergii . Thus, the genus C oxliella is
the secretion of the material for a paralorica lasts artifi cial; however, it cannot be disbanded as the species
several hours and its spiraled accretion yields the affi liations of its members are unknown (Chapter 3 ).

The tintinnid lorica 29
Fig. 2.11 Phenotypes produced by F avella ehrenbergii during the cell cycle (live cultured specimens; adapted from Laval - Peuto
1981 ). Paraloricae of c oxliella form showing the variability in length (a – c) and an open posterior end (d). Cultured specimen
(e) with an exceptionally long epilorica not known from plankton samples. L, lorica; P, peduncle. Scale bars 100 μ m (a – d) and
300 μ m (e) .
Epiloricae may be added anteriorly to the protolori- parts of their hyaline loricae (Fig. 2.9 ; Laval - Peuto &
cae and paraloricae of F . ehrenbergii (Figs 2.8 , 2.10g – i , Brownlee 1986 ). On the other hand, several other
and 2.11 e). They form one or more additional collars species apparently lack helical structures in their
with a helical structure, indicating a slow formation hyaline loricae, for example Petalotricha with its bowl -
owing to the concomitant production of the lorica shaped loricae or Salpingella with its extremely long
material by the trophont, like for paraloricae. When a tubular loricae. Gold & Morales (1975b) suggested that
lorica becomes very long because of the addition of the lorica of Parafavella is layered down by the cell in a
epiloricae, the extended cell is no longer able to reach yet - to - be described manner, involving the cell mem-
the lorica opening, and the peduncle is thus attached brane as template, because no growth region is recog-
more anteriorly. However, extraordinarily long loricae nizable. These suggestions indicate that there might be
as observed in cultures (Figs 2.10 i and 2.11 e) have not further modes of lorica formation and different cell
been found in natural populations, probably because cycles in tintinnids with hyaline loricae; however,
they are cumbersome for locomotion. Accordingly, further studies, especially, on cultured species, are
such long loricae are perhaps abandoned and a new required for verifi cation.
lorica is built.
Both protoloricae and paraloricae are built from the
posterior to the anterior end by the proter and the tro- Formation of hard, agglomerated loricae
phont, respectively. This contradicts previous hypoth-
eses suggesting a backward construction and the For species with agglomerated loricae (Figs 1.4 and
assistance of the opisthe (Kofoid 1930) , but it matches 2.1 f – j), it is the capability to agglutinate particles and
the observations by Biernacka (1952) on Tintinnopsis , the implicated complex behavior, which received most
which forms agglomerated loricae. attention. However, the steps of cell division and lorica
A phenotypic plasticity of the loricae, as found in formation are not as easily observed as in hyaline forms.
Favella ehrenbergii , is also supposed for several further The principal question addressed has been the origin
tintinnids, in which helical structures occur at least in of the mineral or biogenic particles, which cover the

30 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
entire lorica (e.g., in Tintinnopsis and Leprotintinnus ) or lorica (Fig. 2.9 ). A similar phenotypic plasticity is also
only the bowl (e.g., in C odonellopsis and Stenosemella ). expected in other species with agglomerated loricae.
Loricae exclusively covered with diatoms or cocco- Because the attached particles often obscure the
liths (Fig. 2.2 a), those with large particles on the bowl matrix, the spiraled structures, especially in the para-
and small ones around the lorica opening (Fig. 2.1 f), loricae, might, however, not be recognizable. It cannot
as well as loricae composed of an agglomerated bowl be excluded that besides the mode of lorica formation
and a hyaline collar (Fig. 2 .1g , h) indicate some kind described above, others exist.
of particle selection and a certain behavior of the
ciliate during the lorica construction. Different sources
of the particles have been suggested: biogenic particles Soft, agglomerated loricae
from their food remnants (Hofker 1931a ; Gold &
Morales 1977 ; Takahashi & Ling 1984 ), suspended Soft, agglomerated loricae characterize the family Tin-
particles from the water column (Gold & Morales tinnidiidae, which occurs in marine, brackish, and
1976a, c ), and particles from the sediment (Gold & freshwater habitats. In lakes, the Tintinnidiidae are
Morales 1976a, c ; Rassoulzadegan 1980 ). Because the dominating tintinnid group. Only two freshwater
tintinnids occasionally divide more than once a day species with hard, agglomerated loricae are known:
(Chapter 9 ) and the distances between the sediment Codonella cratera and Stenosemella lacustris (Foissner &
and the upper water layers with the tintinnid prey are Wilbert 1979 ; Foissner & O ’ Donoghue 1990 ; Foissner
large relative to tintinnid swimming speeds (Chapter et al. 1999 ).
4 ), even in relatively shallow waters, the use of parti- Abiogenic and biogenic particles are incorporated in
cles from the sediment is unlikely. Concerning particle the jelly - like, structureless matrix of the soft loricae
selectivity, the fi ndings are contradictory: Winter et al. (Foissner & Wilbert 1979 ; Bernatzky et al. 1981 ).
(1986) suggested that tintinnids are not strongly selec- Observations of cell division and lorica construction
tive, but restricted by particle size, whereas Takahashi are even rarer than in species with hyaline or hard,
& Ling (1984) and Wasik et al. (1996) assumed a capa- agglomerated loricae. Although these few studies
bility to select biogenic particles, as at least some tintin- reported the common process of lorica formation by
nids do not single out the dominant ones. The chemical the proter, they also indicated a second, very different
composition of the particles seems to be irrelevant mode by which the proter might obtain a lorica. Entz
(Gold 1979 ). In species with hyaline collars, the agglu- Sr (1885) noticed a bipartition of the lorica in T intin-
tination stops after construction of the agglomerated nidium fl uviatile . The rotation of the opisthe resulted in
bowl probably because of a change in the ciliate’ s a twisted middle of the lorica. Finally, this narrowed
behavior, the habitat, or the stickiness of the lorica portion broke, producing a posteriorly open lorica for
material; in Stenosemella , a second agglomerated collar the proter and an anteriorly shortened lorica for the
might occur (Agatha & Tsai 2008 ). opisthe. Similarly, Reck (1988) described a process
The inconsistent results indicate that there is no named “ lorica splitting ” in T intinnidium pusillum ; here,
single way in tintinnids to build an agglomerated the “ co - operation ” of both opisthe and proter caused
lorica, but several. The experiments by Gold (1979) the break of the twisted lorica. Reck considered “ lorica
demonstrated that the lorica material loses its ability to splitting ” an adaptive strategy against selective pres-
agglutinate particles after hardening. sure in temperate lakes and assumed it also for coastal
The construction of agglomerated loricae is proba- and estuarine species. In samples from marine systems,
bly not fundamentally different from that in species pairs of apparently recently divided Tintinnidium cili-
with hyaline loricae. This assertion is based on obser- ates can be found in a single lorica (M. Laval - Peuto,
vations of species, such as T intinnopsis campanula , from unpublished observations). The prerequisite for lorica
plankton samples (Daday 1887 ; Margalef & Dur á n splitting is, in any case, the possession of a soft lorica.
1953 ) and laboratory maintenance (Fig. 2.12 ). The
rather translucent lorica of T . campanula allowed obser-
vations of the ciliate building the everted spiraled Problems of lorica typological taxa
collar of its protolorica, to which a second everted
collar (epilorica) may be added (Fig. 2.9 ); additionally, The tintinnid classifi cation established by Kofoid &
the species is able to produce an entirely spiraled para- Campbell (1929, 1939) was based exclusively on char-

The tintinnid lorica 31
Fig. 2.12 Lorica formation in T intinnopsis campanula from fi eld material (from live specimens; originals of M. Laval - Peuto).
The loricae are translucent owing to the only sparsely agglomerated particles. Arrowheads mark pin - shaped tentaculoids.
First, the posterior lorica portion with a process is formed, and the ciliate attaches to the bottom of the lorica by its contractile
peduncle (a, b). Next, the lorica elongates at the anterior end (c, d). The spiraled anterior lorica portion (d) indicates a slow
formation. Finally, a fl aring collar is formed, which has particles agglomerated also on its inner wall (e). Owing to the lack of a
posterior process (f), this phenotype was regarded as a distinct species (T . b ü tschlii ) by Kofoid & Campbell (1929) . AZM, adoral
zone of membranelles; L, lorica; P, peduncle. Scale bars 40 μ m (a – c) and 80 μ m (d – f).
acteristics of the loricae. By focusing on relatively small and ongoing critiques, Kofoid and Campbell ’ s classifi -
variations in the morphology of this extracellular cations have remained nearly intact as the system used
product as a means to distinguish species, many forms by protistologists and ecologists, because the robust
and variants were raised to species rank (Chapter 3 ). loricae are more easily collected, preserved, and thus
Kofoid and Campbell cited, but neglected, previous studied than the fragile ciliate cells. The cytological fea-
excellent publications, for example that of Brandt tures are recognizable only during patient live observa-
(1907) , who stated that species circumscriptions solely tion and after application of special staining techniques
based on lorica features are arbitrary, depending on the (Chapter 3 ). However, several cytological features are
recognition of variants as distinct species. Brandt even promising for the establishment of a natural tintinnid
emphasized that only by the thorough study of the cell classifi cation and the circumscription of species (for
features as well as the lorica structure and texture, the details, see Chapter 3 ). Differences in the pheno-
real species limits are recognizable and a natural clas- typic plasticity of the loricae, the chemical composi-
sifi cation can be established. Despite early criticisms tion of the lorica material, the wall texture, and the

32 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
morphology of the resting cysts are possibly also of of discontinuous alveolar layers in T . parva grown in
taxonomic signifi cance (Chapter 3 ; Laval - Peuto & particle - free cultures (Laval - Peuto et al. 1979 ); (3) a
Brownlee 1986 ). monolaminar and compact matrix found in a Tintin-
Even nowadays, our knowledge about tintinnids is nopsis species (Laval - Peuto 1980 ); and (4) a mono-
still insuffi cient to modify signifi cantly the concept of laminar and fi brous matrix in T. parvula grown in
Kofoid & Campbell (1929, 1939) . Molecular methods almost particle - free cultures (Fig. 2.14 f; Agatha
combined with taxonomic investigations of the cell 2010b ). Besides the somatic ciliary pattern, the matrix
and the lorica, applying modern methods, will fi nally texture thus represents a promising feature for a reli-
lead to a far - reaching revision of tintinnid classifi ca- able subdivision of the paraphyletic genus T intinnopsis
tion (Chapter 3 ). Nevertheless, the monographs of (Chapter 3 ). In the case of T. parva and T . parvula ,
Kofoid and Campbell are precious inventories of the however, cultivation artifacts cannot be excluded,
early literature and nearly complete catalogues, namely the textures of specimens from particle - free
showing the remarkable diversity of tintinnid loricae. cultures might deviate from that of specimens from
fi eld material (Agatha 2010b ).
The soft, agglomerated lorica matrix in Tintinnidium
2.3 ULTRASTRUCTURE OF LORICAE fl uviatile appears structureless in the scanning electron
microscope (Foissner & Wilbert 1979 ; Bernatzky et al.
Although tintinnid loricae are often separated into 1981 ). It resembles that of the freshwater species T in-
two major groups, namely the “ agglomerated ” and tinnopsis cylindrata (Fig. 2 .1i , j; Bernatzky et al. 1 981) ,
“ hyaline ” ones, there are actually four general lorica whose close relationship to the genus T intinnidium
types. The fi rst, the supposedly primitive one (Kofoid has also been inferred from its somatic ciliary pattern
& Campbell 1939 ), is soft and agglomerated. It occurs (Chapter 3 ). In loricae of a marine Tintinnidium species
in Tintinnidium , Membranicola , and L eprotintinnus of formed in an almost particle - free culture, a thin fi lm
the family Tintinnidiidae (Fig. 2.1 i, j). The second type covers several layers of fi brous globules held together
is also agglomerated, but hard, as in species of the by anastomosing fi bers. Because these globules are
genus Tintinnopsis (Fig. 2.1 f). The loricae of the third similar to the just extruded lorica forming unites in
type are composed of a bowl (broadened lorica other tintinnids (Figs 2.6 and 2.7 ), this texture possi-
portion) and collar of distinct compositions: the bowl bly represents a cultivation artifact (Gold & Morales
is hard and agglomerated, the collar hyaline. This type 1976c ).
is seen, for example, in species of the genera Codonel- Loricae composed of an agglomerated bowl and a
lopsis and Stenosemella of the families Dictyocystidae hyaline collar also show diverse wall textures, and dif-
and Stenosemellidae, respectively (Fig. 2.1 g, h). The ferences might even occur within a single genus. For
fourth lorica type is entirely hyaline and found, for instance, a monolaminar texture with alveoli was
instance, in Climacocylis , Dadayiella , Eutintinnus , found in Codonellopsis gaussi (Wasik et al. 1997a ),
Favella , Rhabdonella , Schmidingerella , and Steenstrupiella whereas a possibly continuous organic matrix overlaid
of the families Metacylididae, Ptychocylididae, Rhab- with fi brous material was recognizable in C . americana
donellidae, and Tintinnidae (Figs 2.1 a– e , 3 .16a , c, g, after removing the agglomerated particles (Gold &
and 3.17a , b). The cladistic and genetic analyses indi- Morales 1977 ). These fi bers resemble those composing
cate that the hard, agglomerated loricae and the the in vitro- formed loricae of Tintinnopsis parvula (Fig.
hyaline ones do not represent separate taxonomic 2.14 f; Agatha 2010b ), in which, however, an inner
entities (Chapter 3 ). organic layer was not found. The lorica matrix of S teno-
Within these types, investigations of the ultrastruc- semella is again monolaminar with alveoli (Fig. 2 .14e ;
ture revealed distinct subtypes. This is apparent in the own data of S. Agatha).
variety of textures reported for different species of the Three main types of wall texture are found in hyaline
genus Tintinnopsis , all with hard, agglomerated loricae. loricae. A monolaminar texture with alveoli occurs in
So far, four distinct types of lorica wall matrixes have the loricae of Favella (Figs 2.14 b and 3.16 d; Hedin
been described: (1) a monolaminar texture with alveoli 1975b ; Laval - Peuto 1994 ), R habdonella (Fig. 2.14 c),
is found inT. lobiancoi (Fig. 2.13 b; Wasik et al. 1997a ; Schmidingerella (Figs 2.14 a and 3.17 d), X ystonella
Wasik 1998 ); (2) a matrix with a variable number (S. Agatha, unpubl. observations), Helicostomella

The tintinnid lorica 33
Fig. 2.13 Schemes of lorica wall textures based on transmission electron micrographs of fi eld material (a, b, based on data
from Wasik et al. 1 997a ; c, e, f, based on data from Laval - Peuto 1994 ; d, based on data from Hedin 1975b ; g, based on a
micrograph kindly provided by W. Coats). (a) Monolaminar texture of the overlapping spirals in the about 0.9 μ m thick,
hyaline collar wall of H elicostomella subulata . (b) Monolaminar texture with alveoli and embedded particles (asterisks) in the
about 1.5 μ m thick, agglomerated wall of T intinnopsis lobiancoi . (c) Trilaminar texture with three layers of different tubules in
the about 1.2 μ m thick, hyaline wall of P etalotricha ampulla . (d) Monolaminar and alveolar texture and triangles with minute
alveoli in the about 1.8 μ m thick, hyaline wall of P arafavella gigantea . (e) Monolaminar and tubular texture probably of a
mullion (about 1.8 μ m × 2.7 μ m) in D ictyocysta elegans . Arrowhead marks the lorica sac lining the lorica. (f) Trilaminar
texture in the about 2.8 μ m thick, hyaline wall of an U ndella species. (g) Fusion of two cross - striated circular platelets in the
monolaminar and compact, about 0.5 μ m thick, hyaline wall of E utintinnus pectinis .
(Fig. 2.13 a), Laackmanniella (Wasik et al. 1997a ; Wasik andC. vanh ö ffeni , the wall is monolaminar with alveoli
1998 ), and Parafavella (Fig. 2.13 d; Hedin 1975b ; (Wasik et al. 1997a ; Wasik 1998 ). In contrast, C. con-
Sokolova & Gerassimova 1 984; Wasik et al. 1997a ). In vallaria has a trilaminar wall texture with alveolar
Eutintinnus , the lorica wall is monolaminar and inner and outer layers and a tubular middle layer,
compact, as probably in Amphorides , Salpingella , and which is similar to that found in P etalotricha . Fur-
several further genera. Transmission electron micro- thermore, the wall texture changes towards the ante-
graphs showed that the Eutintinnus lorica is apparently rior lorica end in C. convallaria owing to a reduction
composed of cross - striated platelets stuck together of the middle layer and its fi nal disappearance in
with their narrowed margins (Figs 2.13 g, 6.7 a; Laval - the collar (Wasik & Miko ł ajczyk 1992 ). In some hyaline
Peuto 1994 ). species, the alveolar pattern becomes more complex
A trilaminar texture with thick inner and outer by a branching of the alveoli septa (C ymatocylis ,
layers enclosing a tubular middle layer was found in Helicostomella ; Wasik et al. 1997a ; Wasik 1998 ) or the
the hyaline loricae of C yttarocylis and P etalotricha (Fig. formation of triangles with minute alveoli at their
2.13 c; Laval 1972 ; Laval - Peuto 1994 ), whereas the corners (P arafavella ; Fig. 2.13 d; Hedin 1975b ; Sokolova
middle layer is alveolar in P roplectella and U ndella & Gerassimova 1984 ; Wasik et al. 1997a ).
(Fig. 2.13 f; Laval - Peuto 1980, 1994 ). Different wall A tubular texture occurs in the frames of the
textures occur in the genus C ymatocylis . In C. drygalskii fenestrated lorica in D ictyocysta (Figs 2.13 e, 2.14 d;

34 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 2.14 Rupture surfaces (a – c, e) and surface (d, f) views showing the wall textures in loricae from fi eld material (a – e) and
a particle -f ree culture (f) in the scanning electron microscope (originals of S. Agatha). (a) Monolaminar texture with alveoli
and reticulate ridges on the outer surface in S chmidingerella arcuata (compare with Fig. 3.17 ). (b) Monolaminar texture with
alveoli and smooth outer surface in F avella panamensis (compare with Fig. 3.16 ). (c) Monolaminar texture with alveoli, spiraled
surface ribs, and pores in R habdonella spiralis . (d) Tubular texture in D ictyocysta mitra . The lorica is lined by a lorica sac (LS).
(e) Monolaminar texture with alveoli in S tenosemella ventricosa . Owing to the rupture, some formerly embedded particles were
lost (asterisks). (f) Monolaminar texture with fi bers in T intinnopsis parvula from a particle - free culture (possibly an artifact).
Scale bars 2 μ m (a, f), 10 μ m (b), and 5 μ m (c – e).

The tintinnid lorica 35
Laval - Peuto 1994 ; Agatha 2010a ). A further texture niaux 1974 ); however, proteins are usually among the
type was found in the hyaline lorica of Dadayiella main components.
ganymedes . In this species, the lorica wall shows a In tintinnids, there is a long history of investigations
complex pattern of longitudinal and dextrally spiraled into the chemical composition of their loricae, dating
lines and its outer lorica surface exhibits irregularly back to Fol (1881) . The most comprehensive studies
arranged globules of different sizes and ridges formed were conducted by Daday (1887) , Entz Jr (1909a, b) ,
by whorls overlapping the posterior portion of the next and Hofker (1931a). Usually, a chitinous nature of the
whorl (Lecal 1967 ). lorica wall or matrix was inferred from their resistance
Overall, it is obvious that the lorica wall texture in against strong bases. However, Entz Jr (1909b) and
tintinnids varies considerably among the basic lorica Bussers & Jeuniaux (1974) excluded chitin, at least for
types and occasionally even among species of the same some species, and Entz Jr (1909b) suspected a protein-
genus. Thus, the similarities in lorica morphology that aceous substance. Later studies, even using energy -
unite species in a genus or genera in higher - level taxa dispersive X - ray spectroscopy (EDX analysis; Wasik
are not necessarily refl ected in the texture of the et al. 1997b) or further histochemical methods (Gold
loricae. However, the current classifi cation of tintin- 1968, 1980 ; Gold & Morales 1975b ) failed to identify
nids does not account for differences in wall texture. clearly the composition of tintinnid loricae. Conse-
So, the wall texture may fi nally turn out to be of quently, Agatha & Simon (2012) recently readdressed
taxonomic signifi cance in some groups. For instance, the subject, applying previous techniques and new
in the paraphyletic genus Tintinnopsis , the different methods, for example enzymatic digestion and high -
wall textures might be characteristic of the separate resolution transmission electron microscopy. Their
branches in the morphologic and gene trees (Figs 3 .2 results, along with those from previous studies, are
and 3.13 ). summarized below (for details on the species studied
and on the histochemical and proteolytic methods, see
Agatha & Simon 2012 ).
2.4 CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF LORICAE
History of chemical studies Cytochemical stains and
enzymatic experiments
Several protists are able to construct tests, shells, or
loricae, which are often quite elaborate. The study of Most studies were performed on loricae of marine tin-
these fascinating loricae concerns not only their mor- tinnids. Thus, most data are available on hyaline and
phology and formation process, but also their chemi- hard, agglomerated loricae, whereas the soft, agglom-
cal composition. In foraminifera, the test walls and erated loricae of the species mainly occurring in fresh-
matrixes sticking together the agglomerated particles water have rarely been studied.
are of proteinaceous nature (Hedley 1963 ; Pierce et al. Former investigations inferred from the resistance of
1968 ; Hedley & Rudall 1974 ; Bowser & Bernhard the loricae against strong bases a chitinous material.
1993 ); the material was often called “t ectin ” or “ pseu- Actually, the loricae demonstrated an astonishing re-
dochitin” (Hedley 1963 ). Likewise, the organic tests of sistance , withstanding potassium hydroxide at 160 ° C
Amoebozoa (Moraczewski 1970, 1971a, b ) and fi lose for 40 minutes, in the experiments of Agatha & Simon
amoebae (Hedley 1960 ) consist of proteins. Chitin was (2012) . However, the Van - Wisselingh test did not
detected in the loricae of the peritrich ciliate Cothurnia reveal chitin in the hyaline lorica of Rhabdonella spiralis
sp. and the heterotrich ciliate Parafolliculina violacea and the hard, agglomerated ones of Codonella aspera
as well as in the resting cysts of the genera B lephar- andStenosemella ventricosa . Furthermore, a dissolution
isma , B ursaria , C limacostomum , Cyclogramma , Euplotes , of the loricae took place after an elongated exposure
Fabrea , Nassula , Nassulopsis , P hacodinium , P seudomicro- to the strong, hot base (Bussers & Jeuniaux 1974 ;
thorax , T elotrochidium (Bussers & Jeuniaux 1974 ), and Agatha & Simon 2012 ). So, the alkaline treatment was
Meseres (a rather close relative of the tintinnids: see probably insuffi cient (too short exposure periods and/
Chapter 3 and Foissner et al. 2007 ). In other ciliate or too low temperatures) in former studies to observe
species, the resistant resting cysts contain other the disintegration of the loricae, and the chitin - specifi c
polysaccharides, proteins, and/or lipids (Bussers & Jeu- staining was not applied. The failure of the chitinase

36 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
digestion in the hard, agglomerated loricae of Codonella in potassium hydroxide, its presence can be excluded in
aspera , Tintinnopsis cf. c ylindrica, and T . compressa , and the hyaline loricae of A mphorides , Cyttarocylis , Petalot-
the hyaline ones of Eutintinnus brandti and Rhabdonella richa , Rhabdonella , and U ndella , the soft, agglomerated
spiralis , also excluded chitin as main component of the lorica of Tintinnidium, and the hard, agglomerated
lorica walls and matrixes (Agatha & Simon 2 012) . Ac- loricae of Codonella , Codonellopsis , Dictyocysta , and Tin-
cordingly, the inference of a chitinous lorica material tinnopsis. Furthermore, keratin stains with Millon’ s
in the former studies was probably based on inade- solution (it detects some phenols, especially the amino
quate experiments. acid tyrosine), but most loricae did not color (Fol 1 881;
The presence of various other polysaccharides was Daday 1887 ; Faur é - Fremiet 1908 ; Entz Jr 1909a, b ;
excluded by the periodic acidic Schiff reaction in the Bussers & Jeuniaux 1974 ), and hair keratin produced
hard, agglomerated lorica of T intinnopsis cf. c ylindrica a much higher sulfur peak in the EDX analysis than the
and the hyaline one of Rhabdonella spiralis (Agatha & loricae (Agatha & Simon 2012 ).
Simon 2 012) . After application of iodine alcohol or Some proteins are, however, known to persist in hot
Lugol ’ s solution, the hard, agglomerated loricae of and concentrated potassium hydroxide for a while and
Codonella and T intinnopsis beroidea and the hyaline ones they did not stain with Millon’ s reagent (Krishnan
of Petalotricha , Proplectella , and R. spiralis became 1954 ; Moraczewski 1971a ). The fi ndings of Agatha &
yellow – brown (Entz Jr 1909b ), indicating glycogen. Simon (2012) actually indicated a proteinaceous com-
This demonstrates a variability in the occurrence of position of the lorica walls and matrixes: (1) the pro-
glycogen in R. spiralis and the genus T intinnopsis . Based teinase K digestion of the hyaline loricae of C limacocylis
on the data available, it can be concluded that polysac- and Eutintinnus and the hard, agglomerated one of
charides are probably never the main component in Tintinnopsis levigata ; (2) the detection of nitrogen in
tintinnid loricae. the EDX analyses of the hyaline loricae in Eutintinnus
A proteinaceous, horny, or keratin- l ike substance in and Rhabdonella and the hard, agglomerated ones of
the lorica walls and matrixes was assumed by Kent Codonella , Codonellopsis , Stenosemella, and T intinnopsis
(1880 – 1882) , Entz Jr (1909b) , and Laval - Peuto & (Fig. 2.15 and Plate 2.1 ); (3) the crystal lattice revealed
Barria de Cao ( 1987). Because keratin is easily soluble by high - resolution transmission electron microscopy
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 2.15 EDX analysis in the scanning electron microscope, using uncoated, ethanol - fi xed material ( adapted from Agatha &
Simon 2012 ). The analyzed area of the E utintinnus angustatus lorica is marked by a white frame (approximately 11 μ m × 9 μ m
in size) . Because this portion of the lorica was freely suspended in the vacuum, elemental detection occurred without
infl uence of the carbon substrate.

The tintinnid lorica 37
in the hyaline E utintinnus lorica, which resembles the sistent results were obtained, possibly because of the
proteinaceous surface layer (S - layer) of bacteria and application of different fi xatives. Specimens of R hab-
archaea (Fig. 2.16 b – d); and (4) the striation recogni- donella spiralis varied in their staining intensity even in
zable in sections of the hyaline E utintinnus lorica wall the same experiment. Although quite often applied, the
(Figs 2.13 g and 6.7a ), which is similar to that pro- signifi cance of this stain concerning the detection of
duced by crystalline proteins in extruded trichocysts proteins is doubtful (Baker 1958 ; Kanwar 1960 ). Acid
and kinetodesmal fi bers of ciliates. fuchsin, clearly indicating proteins, and phosphor –
By means of EDX analysis, Wasik et al. (1997b) ana- molybdenum acid, indicating proteins and alkaloids,
lyzed the hard, agglomerated loricae of Codonellopsis gave positive results in Tintinnopsis (Merkle 1909 ).
gaussi , L aackmanniella naviculaefera , and Tintinnopsis Further stains, which were more or less specifi c for
lobiancoi and the hyaline ones of Cymatocylis affi nis/ proteins or certain amino acids, produced inconsistent
convallaria , Helicostomella subulata , and P arafavella den- results. Intrageneric variations were observed, espe-
ticulata . The EDX spectrogram was only shown for L . cially, in the hard, agglomerated loricae of C odonella ,
naviculaefera without a detailed description of the fi nd- Codonellopsis , and Tintinnopsis and the hyaline lorica of
ings. Interestingly, the highest EDX peaks observed cor- Favella (for details, see Agatha & Simon 2012 ). Intraspe-
responded to copper and zinc, indicating that the lorica cifi c differences were recorded in the freshwater species
of L. naviculaefera consisted of brass, which is less likely; Codonella cratera with its hard, agglomerated lorica
thus, the composition of the electron microscopic stub (Entz Jr 1909a, b ; Foissner & Wilbert 1979 ). Even
was probably analyzed. Recently, Kaulich et al. (2009) within a single lorica, deviations in the staining prop-
performed low - energy X - ray fl uorescence microscopy erties occurred (S tenosemella ventricosa ; Plate 2.2 g – i;
on the hard, agglomerated lorica of Tintinnopsis radix . Agatha & Simon 2012 ).
All loricae analyzed by Agatha & Simon (2012) The fi rst high - resolution transmission electron mi-
revealed carbon, nitrogen (not mentioned by Kaulich croscopic study was performed on the hyaline, mono-
et al. 2009 ), and oxygen, indicating organic lorica laminar, and compact lorica of Eutintinnus angustatus
walls and matrixes (Fig. 2.15 and Plate 2.1 ). Inorganic (Agatha & Simon 2012 ). This mode of transmission
components, such as sodium, potassium, magnesium, electron microscopy allowed distinctly deeper insights
chlorine, and sulfur, which stem from sea water traces into the composition of lorica by displaying crystallo-
in the samples, were also recorded. In agglomerated graphic structures. Possibly because of the desiccation
loricae or lorica portions, peaks of further elements of the ethanol - fi xed loricae, the walls were slightly
occurred, namely of aluminum and silicon (Plate 2.1 ), wrinkled and ruptured (Fig. 2.16 b). Minute details
owing to the presence of mineral particles (Gold & of the lorica surface became recognizable by high -
Morales 1975b ; Agatha & Simon 2012 ). resolution transmission electron microscopy, namely a
In contrast to proteins, the polysaccharides cellu- crystal lattice (Fig. 2.16 b – d) and electron - dense aggre-
lose, starch, and glycogen do not exhibit nitrogen in gates of bitter salt and spots of sodium and potassium
EDX analyses, and chitin with its N - acetyl groups can chloride (Fig. 2.16 b). The ultrastructure was identical
be excluded to be a lorica component by the Van - in different regions of the lorica wall. By means of a
Wisselingh test and/or the failure of the chitinase computer algorithm, the fast Fourier transform, peri-
digestion. Therefore, the data indicate a proteinaceous odic structures in the image gave rise to sharp spots in
material in the lorica walls and matrixes. the resulting diffraction pattern. After application of
Staining with mercuric bromophenol blue was con- Fourier fi ltering and at maximum magnifi cation, the
ducted by Gold (1968) , Gold & Morales (1975b) , Wasik lorica surface revealed a hexagonal symmetry of the
et al. (1997b) , and Agatha & Simon (2012) . A positive crystal lattice with a periodicity of about 23.7 nm;
reaction was found in the hyaline loricae of Clima- the fi nest structural details of the crystal hold a size of
cocylis , Cymatocylis , Eutintinnus , P arafavella , and Rhab- approximately 3 nm. Three primitive rhombohedral
donella , and the hard, agglomerated ones of Codonella , unit cells each form the hexagonal structures recogniz-
Codonellopsis , and Laackmanniella (Plate 2.2 a – f). An able in the Fourier - fi ltered micrograph (Fig. 2.16 c).
intrageneric variability was observed in T intinnopsis In the deduced simple model of the crystal structure,
with a coloration of T. lobiancoi, but not of T. compressa the main motifs consist of triangles with a diameter
andT. cf. c ylindrica . For H elicostomella subulata , incon- of approximately 18 nm. They are interconnected on

38 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 2.16 Transmission electron micrographs of the hyaline lorica in E utintinnus angustatus at different magnifi cations
(adapted from Agatha & Simon 2012 ). (a) Overview of right lorica half. The 130 μ m × 80 μ m - sized lorica lies almost
horizontally on the electron transparent holey carbon substrate. The black rectangular structures are the copper bars of the
transmission electron microscopic grid. (b) At higher magnifi cation, a crystal lattice is recognizable with some dark spots
(arrow) caused by sodium and potassium chloride. (c) At the highest magnifi cation and after application of Fourier
fi ltering, hexagonal structures are recognizable in the crystal lattice. (d) Scheme of the crystal structure (for details, see
text) .

The tintinnid lorica 39
each side by tiny tubes approximately 7 nm in diame- uncommon proteolytic resistance, resembling that of
ter. The empty spaces between the triangles and tubes, prions, bacteria, and archaea. The most parsimonious
respectively, appear dark (Fig. 2.16 d). assumption is a single origin of the loricae (Chapter 3 )
The crystal lattice recognizable in the surface view and a common kind of organic macromolecule. There-
of the E utintinnus angustatus lorica is very similar to fore, it seems likely that all loricae consist of proteins,
the proteinaceous surface layers (S - layers) of bacteria which are responsible for the resistance of the loricae
and archaea (Schuster & Sleytr 2 000 ; Sleytr et al. against strong, hot bases. Only the protein composition
2001 ). Because only a single high - resolution transmis- and the composition of the additional substances (e.g.,
sion electron microscopic study of a tintinnid lorica is carbohydrates, lipids) vary, causing the observed differ-
currently available, it is unknown whether the crystal- ences between and within the genera and occasionally
line composition is typical of tintinnids, namely shared even within a single species.
by the monolaminar textures with alveoli and the tri- Acid treatments again displayed deviations between
laminar textures and all other compact, monolaminar and within genera; thus, differences in the solubility
walls. were apparently not correlated with the lorica struc-
Conventional transmission electron microscopy of ture (for details, see Agatha & Simon 2012 ). Hydro-
longitudinal and transversal wall sections of the chloric acid not only dissolved the calcium carbonate
hyaline lorica in E utintinnus shows a cross striation due particles (coccoliths) in hard, agglomerated loricae
to alternating thin, electron - dense and broad, electron - (Gold & Morales 1 977 ), but at least occasionally also
lucent stripes (Fig. 2.13 g; Laval - Peuto 1994 ). A similar the loricae themselves. On the other hand, hydrofl uoric
striation and periodicity of the stripes (approximately acid merely removed the siliceous particles from the
35 nm compared with 50 – 55 nm) is found in the hard, agglomerated loricae of Codonellopsis , S tenose-
“ body ” of extruded trichocysts in Paramecium and mella , and T intinnopsis rapa , whereas the lorica matrixes
Frontonia , which consist of crystalline proteins (Haus- or hyaline loricae were not infl uenced (Gold & Morales
mann 1978 ; Rosati & Modeo 2003 ); both the extruded 1977 ; Gold 1980 ; Agatha & Simon 2012 ); only in T in-
lorica material and the extrusomes remain insoluble tinnopsis wangi, the lorica completely broke down,
upon secretion and undergo a rapid change of state, probably because of a very low content of resistant
resulting in an extended extracellular form. matrix substance (Gold 1980 ).
Enzyme digestion experiments provided confl icting The lorica forming granules have rarely been studied
results, revealing a proteolytic resistance in the hyaline ultrastructurally and histochemically. The magnifi ca-
loricae of Schmidingerella arcuata and Rhabdonella spira- tion of the available transmission electron micrographs
lis and the hard, agglomerated loricae of S tenosemella is insuffi cient for the recognition of crystalline struc-
pacifi ca , Tintinnopsis cf. cylindrica , and T. compressa tures (Fig. 2.3 ). However, the osmiophilic nature of
(Agatha & Simon 2012 ). However, these results do not the granules, indicating lipids, unsaturated – C= C –
necessarily reject the idea of proteinaceous lorica bonds, and/or proteins (especially, those with lysine,
material, as proteolytic- resistant proteins are known arginine, tryptophane, histidine, and cysteine), is in
from prions (McKinley et al. 1 983; Basu et al. 2007 ), accordance with the assumption of a proteinaceous
bacteria (Butler et al. 1991 ), and the surface layer lorica material.
(S - layer) of archaea (Kaminski et al. 2010 ). Taxonomically signifi cant differences in the chemi-
Despite intrageneric and even intraspecifi c inconsist- cal composition of the loricae were predicted by
encies in the staining and proteolytic properties, data Kofoid (1930) . Although histochemical and enzy-
in the literature indicate proteins in 13 of the 24 tintin- matic experiments actually demonstrated a variability
nid genera studied, namely in those representing the in the reactions, general differences between the
four main lorica types:Climacocylis , Codonella , Codonel- hyaline, the soft, agglomerated, and the hard, agglom-
lopsis , Dictyocysta , Eutintinnus , F avella , Laackmanniella , erated loricae as well as between freshwater and
Leprotintinnus , Parafavella , Rhabdonella , Stenosemella , marine species are not obvious. Correlations between
Tintinnidium , and T intinnopsis . In the remaining genera, the wall texture, the chemical composition of the
proteins were not or not unequivocally detected, prob- lorica material (Laval - Peuto 1994 ), and the granule
ably because the tests were not specifi c for proteins or types are also not evident. Distinctly more data are
were restricted to certain groups of proteins or amino required to elucidate the taxonomic signifi cance of
acids. Furthermore, the loricae displayed a rather these features.

40 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Despite the number of investigations, identifi cation Gilron & Lynn (1989a) estimated the lorica carbon
of the chemical elements provided by the mother cell content of hard, agglomerated loricae in four species
and incorporated by the proter into the different kinds and of hyaline loricae in six species, using the regres-
of lorica (hard, agglomerated; soft, agglomerated; sion equation of Verity & Langdon (1984) . The carbon
hyaline; composed of a hyaline collar and an agglomer- content of their loricae ranged from 1569 pg in
ated bowl) is still lacking completely. However, these Dadayiella ganymedes to 73 671 pg in A scampbelliella
data are needed to assess properly the role of the tintin- urceolata with an average of 15 828 p g carbon per
nids and their sedimenting loricae in energy fl ux lorica, and the loricae contributed 50 – 79%, on average
as well as in distribution and fate of the organic 63%, to the total carbon content of the tintinnids.
compounds in marine and freshwater ecosystems Using the maximum sedimentation rate of 500 × 103
(Boltovskoy et al. 1993 ; Peulv é et al. 1996 ). loricae m− 2 d − 1 recorded by Price & Pospelova (2011)
and the average carbon content of the loricae esti-
mated by Gilron & Lynn (1989a) , about 7.9 mg carbon
per day and per square metre might have sedimented
2.5 LORICA SEDIMENTATION in the northeast Pacifi c.
The chemical composition of the tintinnid loricae
Because tintinnids are less abundant and diverse in affects their decomposition during sedimentation and
freshwater, most studies have dealt with loricae of at the bottom of the sea or lake. The loricae are rather
marine species. In laboratory experiments with empty resistant against various chemicals and enzymes,
loricae, sinking rates were estimated. For the hyaline as also indicated by fossilized and intact loricae in
loricae of Acanthostomella norvegica , Schmidingerella copepod fecal pellets (Fig. 5.3; Turner & Anderson
taraikaensis , Helicostomella subulata , P arafavella species, 1983 ; Turner 1984b ). However, loricae are apparently
andPtychocylis obtusa , the sinking velocities were cal- rare in copepod fecal pellets compared with the actual
culated to be 0.25 – 2.08 m d− 1 (Suzuki & Taniguchi abundances and production rates of tintinnids, consti-
1995 ). Not surprisingly, agglomerated loricae sink tuting 1.6 – 13.7% in subarctic waters and 3.0 – 15.6%
faster; their sinking rates were estimated to be about in subtropical waters. Thus, most loricae probably
5.7 m d − 1 (66 ± 4.1 μ m s − 1 in Tintinnopsis lobiancoi ; sediment without passing a copepod digestive tract
Jonsson 1989 ) and 1.9 – 15.9 m d − 1 ( Tintinnopsis beroi- (Suzuki 2000 ).
dea , T. ampla ; Suzuki & Taniguchi 1995 ). Sediment traps from about 3800 m depth in the
Interestingly, bulk community sedimentation rates Panama Basin collected both intact hyaline and hard,
appear to vary within a relatively narrow range (a agglomerated loricae with a dominance of the latter
factor of 5) among quite distinct systems, as indicated type (Ling 1992 ), and about 1000 loricae m − 3 were
by sediment trap material. In the northeast Pacifi c, recorded in 7000 m depth (Suzuki & Taniguchi 1995 ).
rates of up to 500 × 10 3 loricae m − 2 d − 1 were recorded These loricae were not decomposed during sedimenta-
from traps at about 200 m depth (Price & Pospelova tion, which might correspond to the proteolytic resist-
2011 ). In the Norwegian Sea, a maximum value of ance observed in some species (Agatha & Simon 2012 ).
about 300 × 103 loricae m− 2 d − 1 was found at 500 m Peulv é et al. (1996) concluded that the N - containing
depth (Bathmann et al. 1990 ), which is similar to the compounds in the material from sediment traps in
rate of 221 × 103 ± 142 × 103 loricae m− 2 d − 1 at 100 m 1000 m and 2000 m depth provide an intermedi-
depths estimated for a Norwegian fjord (Gonz á lez et al. ate stability of the organic nitrogen, namely that
1994 ). In the southeast Pacifi c, a rate of 250 × 10 3 their macromolecular form and/or structure prevent
loricae m − 2 d− 1 at 2300 m depth was estimated them from degradation and thus may lead to com-
(Gonz á lez et al. 2004 ), which is quite similar to the pounds acting as a substantial nitrogen source for the
fi gure of about 201 × 10 3 loricae m− 2 d− 1 at 2195 m benthos.
depth for the northeast tropical Atlantic (Boltovskoy et However, less than 1% of the standing crop is col-
al. 1996 ). These rates are comparable to the 150 × 103 lected in the deep traps, as concluded by Boltovskoy
loricae m − 2 d − 1 found at 100 m depth in the subtropical et al. (1996) based on tintinnid abundances in surface
northeast Atlantic (Passow & Peinert 1993 ) and the waters and their reproduction rates. Decomposition
125 × 103 loricae m− 2 d− 1 at 853 m depth in the eastern during sedimentation was also indicated by a compari-
equatorial Atlantic (Boltovskoy et al. 1993 ). son of data from traps at 853 m depth in the eastern

The tintinnid lorica 41
equatorial Atlantic and at 2195 m depth in the north- middle layer; and the tubular texture. Some further
east tropical Atlantic. The percentage of intact loricae textures are known, but might represent culture -
was lower in the deeper trap (78% compared with 63%; dependent artifacts.
Boltovskoy et al. 1993, 1996 ). Actually, Boltovskoy 4. Chemical composition. The assumption of a chiti-
et al. (1993) observed signs of bacterial degradation nous lorica material was inferred from the resistance
in loricae, and Suzuki & Taniguchi (1995) found a of the loricae against strong bases. However, the expo-
half - value period of lorica decomposition of 0.3 – 1.0 sure periods were too short and the temperatures too
year at 5 ° C in non - sterile GF/F fi ltered sea water. Using low to observe the dissolution of the loricae. This dis-
these data, Suzuki & Taniguchi (1995) calculated integration in hot, strong bases, the absence of chitin -
that the sedimentation velocity is too low and the specifi c stainings, and the failure of digestion by
decomposition velocity is too high to explain the occur- chitinase exclude a chitinous nature in the loricae
rence of loricae in 7000 m depth. Possibly, these tested. In fact, the lorica material seems to consist of
loricae were incorporated into marine snow or fecal proteins in 13 of the 24 genera investigated because of
pellets, which sink faster. But, more likely, they repre- the proteolytic properties and staining reactions. In the
sent the proteolytic - resistant tintinnid loricae, whereas remaining genera, proteins were not or not unequivo-
those with a different chemical composition were cally detected, probably because they are rather
successively digested by bacterial enzymes during uncommon, resembling those of prions, bacteria, and
sedimentation. archaea in their reactions.
5. Lorica sedimentation. Tintinnid loricae were col-
lected in sediment traps at up to 7000 m depth. Differ-
2.6 KEY POINTS ences in the abundances and species compositions
between the plankton communities and the trap
1. Lorica formation. After cell division, the proter pro- material, however, indicated the loss of the less
duces its own (proto - )lorica, whereas the opisthe keeps proteolytic - resistant loricae by bacterial digestion
the old lorica. A tintinnid that lost or abandoned its during sedimentation.
lorica is able to form a paralorica. Both the protolorica 6. Future efforts. By means of culture experiments
and the paralorica can be elongated anteriorly by the and fl uorescence in situ hybridization (which detects
addition of one or more usually spiraled epiloricae. The signature sequences in the DNA), the intraspecifi c phe-
somatic ciliature is probably involved into the forma- notypic plasticity of the tintinnid loricae should be
tion of the lorica. However, a correlation between the studied. Knowledge about the different loricae in
somatic ciliary pattern and the lorica structure is cur- a species ’ cell cycle is necessary for a far - reaching
rently not evident. revision of tintinnid classifi cation at the genus and
2. Lorica structure. The lorica structure largely occasionally the family levels. A quantifi cation of the
depends on the formation process, namely slowly elemental composition of the lorica material is required
formed loricae or lorica parts are often spiraled, to assess the role of tintinnids and their sedimenting
whereas the quickly formed ones are usually continu- loricae in the pelagic and benthic energy fl ux. The
ous. The capability to agglutinate biogenic and/or abio- taxonomic signifi cance of the lorica texture, the types
genic particles is a valuable taxonomic feature at genus of lorica forming granules, and the chemical composi-
and usually at family level, separating the hyaline and tion of the lorica material should be elucidated by
the agglomerated loricae. Under the last type soft, further histochemical, enzymatic, and ultrastructural
agglomerated loricae, hard, agglomerated loricae, and studies.
loricae that are composed of a hyaline collar and a
hard, agglomerated bowl are often subsumed.
3. Lorica texture. The lorica texture depends on the ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
chemical composition of the lorica material and its
hardening properties; thus, it is not very variable. Five We thank the other chapter authors for comments and
main types of textures are distinguished: the mono- ideas, Wayne Coats for providing a transmission elec-
laminar and compact texture; the monolaminar and tron micrograph of a Eutintinnus lorica, and the Aus-
alveolar texture; the trilaminar texture with an alveo- trian Science Fund (FWF; Project P20461 - B17) for the
lar middle layer; the trilaminar texture with a tubular fi nancial support of S. Agatha.

Chapter 3
Systematics and
Evolution of
Tintinnid Ciliates
Sabine Agatha1 and Michaela C. Str ü der - Kypke2
1 University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria
2 University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
42

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 43
3.1 INTRODUCTION (synapomorphies) indicate the true relationships. The
fi rst step in phylogenetic analyses is the detection of
Taxonomy (from Ancient Greek: t axis “ arrangement ” homologous features and the separation of analogous
andnomos “ law ” ) is the science of describing and clas- features (homoplasies), which evolved in unrelated
sifying organisms, and systematics (from Ancient species independently/convergently, for example as an
Greek: systē matik ó s “ ordered ” ) investigates the phylo- adaptation to the environment. By comparison with
genetic relationships among organisms. The systemat- an outgroup (close relatives of the monophyletic group
ics and taxonomy of the extant tintinnids are the topic whose relationships shall be analyzed), the plesiomor-
of the present chapter. phic (ancestral) and apomorphic (derived) states are
In his “ scala naturae ” (ladder of life), the Greek defi ned.
philosopher Aristotle (384 – 322 BC ) already classifi ed Although gene sequence analyses use a variety
organisms according to their perfectness, namely, from of algorithms to infer phylogenetic relationships by
simply to highly organized ones, to order the otherwise means of computer programs (the interested reader is
bewildering diversity of species. The modern hierarchi- referred to Felsenstein 2004 ), cladistic analyses only
cal taxonomic system and binominal nomencla- use the method of maximum parsimony. The parsi-
ture was devised by Carolus Linnaeus (1758) in his mony principle, also called the principle of Occam ’ s
“ Systema Naturae ” . Although initially classifi cation razor, dates back to the medieval and was apparently
was simply a useful means of cataloguing the diversity established by William von Ockham (about 1285 –
of life and providing unambiguous names for the 1347). It suggests that the best estimate is the one with
organisms, the view of taxonomy was changed dis- the fewest assumptions, or in other words, the true
tinctly by Charles Darwin ’ s (1859) famous book “ On phylogeny is the one that requires us to postulate the
the Origin of Species ” . He provided convincing evi- fewest evolutionary changes. The trees based on cladis-
dence that all organisms are descendents of a common tic and gene sequence analyses represent hypotheses
ancestor, i.e. an ancestral species gave rise to daughter that can be tested by the addition of features and taxa.
species through lineage splitting. A taxonomic classifi cation, which uses the group-
Trees convey our hypotheses of the histories of indi- ings of the inferred tree, allows predictions about prop-
vidual organisms, populations, taxa, genes, proteins, erties of the organisms and provides insights into the
or morphological characters and serve to organize processes of speciation, adaptation, and maintenance
and summarize where and how information has of diversity. In this chapter, extant tintinnids are used
changed. Supposing all similarities and differences as model to demonstrate how ciliate evolution can
among organisms are the result of cladogenesis be reconstructed with morphologic, morphogenetic
(lineage splitting) and anagenesis (character change), (reproduction pattern of the pre - existing form; Lynn
the inference of phylogenetic trees through cladistic 2008 ), ultrastructural, and genetic data.
(using derived characters; Mayr & Bock 2002 ) and In tintinnids, there is also a fossil record of the
genetic analyses is a very useful tool. Theodosius loricae, which one might think would be useful in
Dobzhansky (1964) was correct in stating “ nothing in reconstructing phylogenies. However, developmental
biology makes sense except in the light of evolution ” . studies (Chapter 2 ), cladograms (trees built on cladistic
Taxonomic classifi cation should refl ect this evolution- analyses; Mayr & Bock 2002 ) as well as molecular trees
ary history and the natural relationships of organisms. refute the idea of inferring phylogenetic relationships
To reconstruct the unobserved evolution, all available from lorica types. In the following, we will show that
data on the organisms (mainly about morphology, some features or character states are well suitable for
ontogenesis, ultrastructure, and fossils) are compiled inferring relationships, whereas others are not, as they
and analyzed. represent homoplasies.
By investigating the extant species, we develop ideas First, a short sketch of the changeful history of tin-
about morphology and further features in their ances- tinnid taxonomy and classifi cation is given, showing
tors, inferring a close relationship of organisms based the strong infl uence of method developments on ciliate
on their similarity due to inherited traits from their taxonomy (light microscopy, staining techniques, and
common ancestor. However, Hennig (1966) demon- electron microscopy). Then, we follow the evolution
strated that overall similarity might be misleading of tintinnids as inferred from cladistic analyses, dis-
and only the shared derived homologous characters cussing some of the features considered. Using one

44 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
tintinnid genus as example, we demonstrate how infor- The “ inhabitants ” of the loricae were, however,
mation on a taxon can be inferred from the cladogram rarely studied (Clapar è de & Lachmann 1858 ; Haeckel
and its databases, even if some features were not 1873 ; Fol 1881 ; Entz Sr 1884 ; Daday 1887 ), possibly
studied. Next, the methods and results of gene sequence because they move vigorously with and within their
analyses are briefl y described and a molecular tree loricae, are fragile and thus die soon under the light
is compared with the cladogram. The new insights microscope, and do not show many features after pre-
into tintinnid evolution by recent cladistic and genetic servation. The only cytological feature suffi ciently
analyses are incorporated into a revised tintinnid clas- studied at that time was the adoral zone of mem-
sifi cation. Admittedly, it is not the far - reaching revision branelles (fan - like ciliary structures) at the apical cell
that is necessary. However, the present state of knowl- end, the only portion of the ciliate that extends
edge allows only slight modifi cations. Subsequently, out of the lorica. The huge collar membranelles are
the most important similarities and differences in the arranged on an elevated rim around the peristomial
morphology of tintinnids and their relatives as well fi eld with the eccentric buccal cavity and move
as the main features for the reconstruction of the evo- strongly, generating water currents for locomotion
lution in the halteriids, oligotrichids, and aloricate and suspension feeding (Chapter 4 ). Accordingly, the
choreotrichids are extracted. This will elucidate descriptions of tintinnid species focused on lorica
whether the constraints of the pelagic zone caused characteristics and the presence of a conspicuous oral
similar adaptations in these mainly marine ciliate ciliature, especially as the oral structures were the
groups. The gaps in our knowledge about tintinnids and main taxonomic feature for the classifi cation of ciliates
future fi elds of research are the focus of the last section. in general during the ages of discovery and exploita-
tion. The somatic (body) ciliature was comparatively
poorly known.
3.2 HISTORY OF TINTINNID TAXONOMY The fi rst ciliate classifi cations appear strange seen
AND SYSTEMATICS from the present state of knowledge. For instance, Kent
(1880 – 1882) placed the tintinnid genera C odonella ,
The beginning Tintinnidium , Tintinnopsis , and T intinnus and the alori-
cate choreotrichid genus Strombidinopsis together
The fi rst tintinnid was described by M ü ller (1776) with the peritrich genus Vasicola in the order Hetero-
as Trichoda inquilinus (now Tintinnus inquilinus ) from tricha (now belonging to the Postciliodesmatophora)
marine waters. Hence, tintinnids belong to the fi rst owing to the membranellar structures at the apical cell
ciliates ever described. From the beginning, they fasci- end and a rather dense somatic ciliature. The tintinnid
nated amateur microscopists and scientists with their genera Dictyocysta and Petalotricha , the halteriid genus
ability to form wonderful vase - or tube - shaped loricae Halteria , the oligotrichid genera S trombidium , A carella ,
(shells), which are carried through the pelagic zone. and Arachnidium (the last two are nomina oblita,
During the early period of light microscopy, only a forgotten names; Corliss 1 979 ), as well as the hap-
few features of these planktonic unicellular organisms torid genera Mesodinium and D idinium were, however,
could be recognized, as the magnifi cation and resolu- assigned to the order Peritricha (now mainly sessile
tion of the instruments were comparatively low. Nev- ciliates) based on a ciliature almost restricted to an
ertheless, the optics allowed the investigation of the apical “ ciliary wreath ” . With an improved quality
lorica, which is easily collected by nets and preserved of the optics, the descriptions of ciliate species be-
and remains intact after the inhabitant has died. Even came more detailed, but only few tintinnid taxono-
at low magnifi cation, different lorica types could be mists studied the cells. Although Daday (1887) , Brandt
distinguished: (1) hyaline loricae with transparent (1907) , Entz Jr (1909b) , and Hofker (1931a) de-
walls; (2) hard, agglomerated loricae with biogenic and nounced the lorica - based classifi cation of tintinnids
abiogenic particles attached to the entire wall; (3) soft, as likely artifi cial and emphasized the usefulness of
agglomerated loricae with biogenic and abiogenic cytological features, most tintinnid studies did not
particles attached to the whole wall; and (4) hard follow their recommendations.
loricae composed of a hyaline collar and an agglomer- When Kofoid & Campbell (1929) revised this huge
ated bowl (broadened lorica portion; Chapter 2 ). group of ciliates, most species were only known by

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 45
their loricae. Moreover, the authors established many tions, based on studies of lorica features, for example
new species, using minute deviations in lorica shape Enrique Balech ( 1968 and references therein), Miguel
and size. Finally, they regarded 706 species, 51 genera, Dur á n ( 1965 and references therein), and Yoshine
and 12 families of extant (non - fossil) tintinnids as Hada ( 1970 and references therein). Currently, we
valid. In a subsequent revision, which focused on thus know about of approximately 1000 non - fossil tin-
material from the eastern tropical Pacifi c (Chapter 1 ), tinnid species descriptions (Fig. 3.1 ), virtually all solely
they added a further family, 11 genera, and 28 species based on lorica characteristics.
(Kofoid & Campbell 1939 ). A few years later, material Faur é - Fremiet (1970) distinguished the tintinnids
from the Carnegie cruise yielded two additional gen- from the aloricate taxa, although he recognized that
era and 14 new species (Campbell 1942 ). Conse- tintinnids shared a circular adoral zone of mem-
quently, there were about 750 species in 64 genera and branelles with the aloricate strobilidiids. Corliss (1979)
13 families known in the 1940s. Kofoid & Campbell maintained this separation in his valuable book on
(1939) regarded the genera Tintinnidium and Leprotin- ciliated protozoa. His two suborders, Tintinnina and
tinnus , with their soft, agglomerated loricae, as the Oligotrichina, were united in the order Oligotrichida
most primitive tintinnids, followed by the genera Tintin- based on the common characteristic of a reduced
nopsis and C odonella , with their hard, agglomerated somatic ciliature and an apical adoral zone of
loricae. They also suggested that hyaline, monolami- membranelles.
nar lorica walls, as in the genus Eutintinnus , charac-
terize the most highly evolved tintinnids. Almost
concurrently, Kahl (1932) assigned the following three The introduction of staining techniques
families to the suborder Oligotricha (order Spirotricha),
which he distinguished from the heterotrich ciliates In the 1950s, the use of histological staining proce-
by a reduced somatic ciliature: the Tintinnidae (includ- dures caused major changes in ciliate classifi cation. By
ing the aloricate choreotrichid genus Strombidinopsis ), revealing the ciliary patterns, the stains allowed the
the Strobilidiidae ( Strobilidium , Lohmanniella , and C il- characterization of the somatic ciliature and its use
iospina ), and the Halteriidae (M eseres , Halteria , and the for taxonomy and systematics. Notably, the protargol
oligotrichid genus Strombidium ). (silver proteinate) stain was used, revealing the basal
In the following years, there were a few notable con- bodies (basal termination of the cilia) and the nuclear
tributions of further species descriptions and redescrip- apparatus. In 1979, Foissner and Wilbert stained the
Fig. 3.1 Cumulative number of species descriptions in tintinnid ciliates since their discovery in 1776 by O.F. M ü ller plotted
on a log - scale. Distinct increases can be attributed to comprehensive taxonomic works by certain authors. Note that during
the past 20 years, relatively few new tintinnid species have been described.

46 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
fi rst four tintinnid species, all collected from freshwater pattern of halteriids from that of oligotrichids and
(Foissner & Wilbert 1979 ). choreotrichids. The opisthe ’ s oral ciliature develops on
the cell surface in halteriids, as usual for most ciliates,
while this occurs in an invagination in oligotrichids
and choreotrichids. Therefore, Petz & Foissner (1992)
The era of electron microscopy
separated the halteriids (H alteria , M eseres ) from the oli-
gotrichids based on their distinct morphogenetic pat-
The introduction of electron microscopy provided
terns, although the two groups have a C-shaped adoral
further new insights in cell morphology; now, cell
zone of membranelles.
organelles and minute surface structures could be
A separation of oligotrichids and choreotrichids was
studied. Transmission electron microscopy revealed,
also indicated by a developmental characteristic. The
for instance, fi bers associated with the basal bodies.
two groups differ with regard to the shape of the
They were found to be taxonomically important
invagination in which the new mouth develops during
because they are conserved compared with oral struc-
cell division. In oligotrichids, the invagination is tube -
tures, which are exposed to high evolutionary pressure
shaped, whereas in choreotrichids, the invagination
due to their role in food uptake and thus in fi tness.
is pouch-shaped. Based on the internal development
In their famous revision, Small & Lynn (1985) used
of the oral apparatus, the oligotrichids and choreo-
the circular and C - shaped arrangements of the adoral
trichids formed a cluster, which was the sister group to
membranelles as main distinguishing feature to sepa-
the halteriids, the closest relatives to the stichotrich
rate the choreotrichids (tintinnids plus aloricate taxa,
ciliates. This topology was maintained even after
for example Strobilidium and Strombidinopsis ) and the
including further morphologic, morphogenetic, and
oligotrichids (including the halteriids); these two orders
ultrastructural features in a cladistic analysis by
constituted the subclass Choreotrichia within the class
Agatha (2004b) . In the classifi cation by Lynn & Small
Spirotrichea.
(2002) , however, the choreotrichids and oligotrichids
(including the halteriids) are not united by shared
derived characters, but simply represent two of the fi ve
Cladistic analysis subclasses within the spirotrich ciliates.
Protargol staining allowed detailed studies of dividing
tintinnids, in particular the development of the somatic Gene sequence analysis
and oral ciliature for the opisthe (posterior division
product) – a developmental sequence that previously A new era of phylogenetic analyses started with the
could only be studied by observing living cells. The introduction of gene sequencing. In particular, the
developmental characteristics of halteriids ( Halteria ; small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) gene is fre-
Faur é - Fremiet 1953 ; Fernandez - Leborans 1983 ), oli- quently used to infer relationships. In the most recent
gotrichids (S trombidium ; Faur é - Fremiet 1912, 1953 ; general classifi cation of ciliates by Lynn (2008) ,
Kormos & Kormos 1958 ; Deroux 1974 ), and freshwa- genetic data were considered. Based on SSU rRNA
ter tintinnids were combined with morphologic fea- genealogies, Lynn (2008) affi liated the halteriids with
tures in a cladistic analysis by Petz & Foissner (1992, the stichotrich spirotrichs. This point is controver-
1993). sally discussed as the close relationship with the sti-
In terms of development, they found that halteriids chotrichs is neither substantiated by the α - tubulin tree
share with the oligotrichids and choreotrichids a (Snoeyenbos - West et al. 2002 ) nor by morphologic
unique inverse orientation of the opisthe during cell and mor phogenetic (e.g., the enantiotropic division
division, termed an enantiotropic division mode. This mode) characteristics. Recently, Paiva et al. (2009)
is in contrast to most ciliates, in which the proter (ante- concluded from statistical tests on competing phyloge-
rior division product) and opisthe have the same orien- netic scenarios that the resolution of the SSU rRNA
tation, termed a homeotropic division mode, such as gene alone is insuffi cient to defi ne the position of the
in the related hypotrich (e.g., Euplotes ) and stichotrich halteriids unambiguously.
(e.g., O xytricha , Stylonychia ) spirotrichs. However, The molecular data currently available indicate that
there are differences distinguishing the developmental the oligotrichids and choreotrichids are closely related,

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 47
forming a sister group to the stichotrich ciliates, which namely the striae (beaded strands on the collar mem-
include the halteriids (see Snoeyenbos - West et al. branelles), tentaculoids (possibly contractile, fi nger - or
2002 ; Str ü der - Kypke & Lynn 2003, 2008 ; Agatha & pin - shaped cytoplasmic extensions between the collar
Str ü der - Kypke 2007 , 2012 ; Gao et al. 2009 ; Li Z. et al. membranelles), and accessory combs (distinct ridges
2009 ; Kim S.Y. et al. 2010 ). These relationships are between the collar membranelles). Because these
only partially refl ected in the classifi cation of Lynn characters are probably of taxonomic signifi cance,
(2008) . At the same time, Berger (2008) suggested a there is a need for detailed studies, drawings, and
new taxon, the Perilemmaphora, that unites the sti- micrographs of live specimens. Even the lorica requires
chotrichs, halteriids, oligotrichids, and choreotrichids more attention. Apart from the structure of the lorica
based on the presence of a perilemma (additional wall (hyaline or agglomerated), light microscopes
membrane covering the entire cell). Here, for the sake equipped with interference contrast optics often clearly
of simplicity, vernacular names are used, i.e. sticho- show its texture, for example small chambers (alveoli;
trichs, halteriids, oligotrichids, choreotrichids ( = tintin- Chapter 2 ).
nids plus aloricate choreotrichids). Whenever possible, gene sequences (mainly SSU
For tintinnids, characteristics of the lorica have rRNA but also other molecular markers) should be pro-
remained the primary means of distinguishing species. vided in a species description (Lynn & Simpson 2009 ).
It has often been stated that lorica features might show These methods are nowadays routinely used and have
considerable intraspecifi c variability depending on been refi ned so that only few specimens are needed
environmental conditions and the cell cycle (Biernacka for extraction and amplifi cation. Predominantly in
1965, 1968 ; Gold 1974 ; Gold & Morales 1974, 1975c ; cases where morphologic data alone are not suffi cient
Bakker & Phaff 1976 ; Bernatzky et al. 1981 ; Bol- to separate species, or are obscured, molecular analy-
tovskoy et al. 1990 ) and this has been demonstrated ses can help to defi ne species boundaries and determine
in cultures (see Chapter 2; Laval - Peuto 1977, 1981 ). taxonomic placement.
However, the cytological characteristics of relatively
few tintinnid species are known. At this time, we know
the cell features of merely 24 out of the more than
1000 species in the literature (Table 3.1 ). Conse- Monographs and identifi cation keys
quently, Lynn (2008) again provided a lorica - based
classifi cation. He and Loeblich Jr & Tappan (1968) The monographs by Kofoid & Campbell (1929, 1939)
compiled 75 extant valid genera, whereas Laval - Peuto are still foremost concerning the number of included
(1994) considered 67 genera as valid. species. Therefore, it is understandable that these mono-
graphs are generally used for tintinnid identifi cation.
Although these books are outstanding, they should,
Species descriptions and redescriptions however, only represent the fi rst step in species deter-
mination, followed by the study of the original descrip-
Although tintinnids have been known for more than tion. Why? Kofoid & Campbell (1929, 1939) did a
230 years, their classifi cation, based solely on lorica wonderful job; however, (1) they changed the species
characteristics, has remained largely unchanged since circumscriptions by synonymizations that might be
the revision by Kofoid & Campbell (1929) . This clearly not justifi ed; (2) they provided only one line drawing
demonstrates the need for thorough species descrip- per species, which was often not from the original
tions and redescriptions, using live observation, pro- description and might show an uncommon specimen;
targol staining, and electron microscopy. Although (3) the lorica sizes can often only be estimated from
the use of protargol staining is now widely acknowl- the minute single illustrations and thus the size ranges
edged, the value of careful live observations is under - are unknown, especially those of the type population;
appreciated. Many features can be observed only in and (4) similar species and distinguishing features
live specimens, or they are better recognized in live are rarely mentioned. Additionally, some mistakes
than in stained ones, for example the length of the occurred (for instance, illustration 18 shows Stenose-
somatic cilia and adoral membranelles, the position mella ventricosa instead of Tintinnopsis major ; Kofoid &
of the cytopyge (cell anus) as well as the structures Campbell 1929 ), which is not surprising, considering
containing capsules (probably extrusive organelles), the enormous number of species and illustrations

48 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 3.1 Tintinnid species studied after silver impregnation. Five lorica types are distinguished (A – E). (A) Soft,
agglomerated. (B) Soft, agglomerated and with subterminal membrane. (C) Hard, agglomerated. (D) With hyaline collar and
agglomerated bowl. (E) Entirely hyaline.
Species Reference
Codonellacratera (Leidy, 1877) Imhof, 1885; (C) Foissner& Wilbert ( 1979)
Codonellopsis glacialis (Laackmann, 1 907) Kofoid& Campbell, Petz et al.(1995)
1929; (D)
Cymatocylis calyciformis (Laackmann, 1 907) Laackmann,1910; (E) Petz et al.(1995)
Cymatocylisconvallaria Laackmann, 1 910; (E) Petz et al.(1995), Wasik& Miko łajczyk(1994b)
Eutintinnus angustatus (Daday, 1 887) Kofoid& Campbell, 1 939; (E) Choi et al.(1992)
Eutintinnus pectinis (Kofoid & Campbell, 1 929) Kofoid& Campbell, Choi et al.(1992)
1939; (E)
Eutintinnus tenuis (Kofoid & Campbell, 1 929) Kofoid& Campbell, Choi et al.(1992)
1939; (E)
Favella ehrenbergii (Claparè de& Lachmann, 1 858) J örgensen, Kim S.Y. et al.(2010)
1924; (E)
Membranicola tamari Foissner, Berger & Schaumburg, 1 999; (B) Foissner et al.(1999)
Nolaclusilis bicornis Snyder & Brownlee, 1 991; (E) Snyder& Brownlee ( 1991)
Nolaclusilis hudsonicus Sniezek, Capriulo, Small & Russo, 1991; Sniezek et al.(1991)
(E)
Schmidingerella arcuata (Brandt, 1 906) Agatha& Str üder-Kypke, Agatha& Str üder-Kypke(2012)
2012; (E)
Stenosemella lacustris Foissner & O ’Donoghue,1990; (C) Foissner& O ’Donoghue(1990)
Stenosemella pacifi ca Kofoid & Campbell, 1 929; (D) Agatha& Tsai ( 2008)
Tintinnidium fl uviatile (Stein, 1863) Kent, 1881; (A) Foissner& Wilbert ( 1979)
Tintinnidium pusillum Entz, 1 909; (A) Foissner& Wilbert ( 1979)
Tintinnidium semiciliatum (Sterki, 1879) Kent, 1881; (A) Blatterer& Foissner ( 1990),
Song& Wilbert ( 1989)
Tintinnopsis brasiliensis Kofoid & Campbell, 1 929; (C) Cai et al.(2006)
Tintinnopsis campanula (Ehrenberg, 1840) Daday, 1 887; (C) S. Agatha, unpublished observations
Tintinnopsis cylindrata Kofoid & Campbell, 1 929; (A) Foissner& Wilbert ( 1979)
Tintinnopsis cylindrica Daday, 1887; (C) Agatha& Riedel- Lorjé(2006)
Tintinnopsis fi mbriata Meunier, 1 919; (C) Agatha(2008)
Tintinnopsis parvula J örgensen, 1912; (C) Agatha(2010b)
Tintinnopsis tubulosoides Meunier, 1 910; (C) S. Agatha, unpublished observations
included. Although these books are still indispensable & Zattera 1982 ; Gilron et al. 1990 ; Str ü der - Kypke &
in tintinnid identifi cation, the original descriptions Montagnes 2002 ). The most recent key for tintinnids
should thus always be consulted. by Lynn & Small (2002) guides only to representative
Keys distinctly facilitate species determination. genera. So, there is need for a complete key consider-
Those that guide to the tintinnid species are either ing all extant species (about 1000), but such a project
incomplete or restricted to particular geographic is unrealistic as merely 2 – 3% of the lorica - based
areas (Daday 1887 ; Hada 1938 ; Cosper 1972 ; Rampi species have been characterized cytologically. Conse-

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 49
quently, synonymies are impossible to identify with dimensions, namely the cell cortex is drawn as cut
certainty. longitudinally on dorsal side. The adoral zone of
membranelles consists of two parts: large collar
membranelles used for locomotion and suspension
3.3 EVOLUTION OF TINTINNIDS feeding and small buccal membranelles leading to
the eccentric cytostome (cell mouth). Horizontal bars
In this section, we will track the evolution of the tintin- in the kinetal maps symbolize the large collar mem-
nids as shown by the cladistic analysis of extant taxa. branelles, whereas the diagonal bars symbolize those
Currently, we have information on 11 groups of char- membranelles that are partly or entirely in the buccal
acters: (1) the cell shape, (2) the life style, (3) the oral cavity, namely, the elongated collar membranelles
ciliature, (4) the somatic ciliature, (5) the nuclear and the small buccal membranelles. Occasionally, the
apparatus, (6) special organelles and cell structures, somatic cilia are symbolized by horizontal lines.
(7) features of the cell cortex, (8) the lorica, (9) particu- Before we consider evolution within the tintinnids,
lars of cell division, (10) the structure of the resting some earlier relationships resulting in the loricate
cysts (Chapter 7 ), and (11) the particulars of conjuga- choreotrichids should be described. In particular those
tion (reciprocal fertilization, a unique feature of the of the stichotrichs (e.g., Oxytricha , Stylonychia ), hal-
ciliates; Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke 2007, 2012 ). Cer- teriids (e.g., H alteria , Meseres ), oligotrichids (e.g.,
tainly, the number of features will further increase Strombidium , Tontonia ), and aloricate choreotrichids
with our knowledge about tintinnids. (e.g., Strobilidium , Strombidinopsis ), which evolved
Two types of tree result from cladistic analyses: (1) before the tintinnids as indicated by SSU rRNA gene
a cladogram built by the Hennigian argumentation trees (Fig. 3.13 ) and cladistic analyses (Fig. 3.2 ).
based on the discussion of each character and the use
of synapomorphies and the parsimony principle (Fig.
3.2 ) and ( 2) trees generated by maximum parsimony The ancestor of the stichotrichs, halteriids,
computer programs calculating the tree statistics and oligotrichids, and choreotrichids
confi dence estimates of the branches or divisions (Fig.
3.12 ; for methods and interpretation, see below). In The common ancestor of the stichotrichs, halteriids,
the following, only the most important characters oligotrichids, and choreotrichids presumably was a
and their changes are discussed, but all characters dorsoventrally fl attened benthic ciliate with a con-
and their states are summarized in Table 3.2 and their spicuous C - shaped adoral zone of membranelles used
distribution among the taxa is shown in Table 3.3 for suspension feeding and some ventral cirri (ciliary
(for details of the computer methods and the charac- bristles) used for walking (Foissner et al. 2004 ). So,
ters omitted here, see Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke 2007, it resembled what we today would call a stichotrich
2012 ). ciliate. Opposite the adoral zone of membranelles
that extended along the left margin of the peristome,
the ancestor had two monostichomonad (single -
Kinetal maps rowed) membranes, often called undulating mem-
branes. The endoral membrane extended in the buccal
Protargol stains the single (monokinetids) and paired cavity and the paroral membrane extended on the
(dikinetids) basal bodies as well as the linked basal buccal lip bordering the buccal cavity on the right
bodies in the polykinetids (e.g., the bases of the mem- (Petz & Foissner 1992 and references therein). The
branelles). The patterns displayed are complicated and dorsal somatic ciliature usually comprised three to
diffi cult to understand in tintinnids owing to the globu- nine longitudinal kineties (Curds & Wu 1983 ; Berger
lar or conical cell shape and the curvature of the kine- 1999, 2006) . As already recognized by Small & Lynn
ties (ciliary rows; Figs 3.3 , 3.4 , 3.7 , and 3.10 ). To (1985) , the structure of the somatic kinetids (basal
facilitate portrayal and comparison of the somatic body/ies plus associated fi brillar structures) is impor-
ciliary patterns, kinetal maps were introduced (Foiss- tant for reconstructing evolution, but only Agatha
ner & Wilbert 1979 ; Choi et al. 1992 ). These maps (2004a, b) and Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke (2007) used
depict the ciliary patterns of a protargol - stained it in cladistic analyses of the oligotrichids and chore-
trophont (the non - dividing, feeding stage) in two otrichids, respectively. They hypothesized that the

Fig. 3.2 Cladogram generated by the Hennigian argumentation method (adapted from Agatha, S. & Str ü der - Kypke, M.C.
(2012) Reconciling cladistic and genetic analyses in choreotrichid ciliates (Protists, Spirotrichea, Oligotrichea). Journal of
Eukaryotic Microbiology, in press) . For character coding, see Table 3.2 . Black squares mark apomorphies. Asterisks denote
homoplasies.Semitintinnidium , subgenus S emitintinnidium of genus T intinnidium with T . semiciliatum ; Tintinnidium , subgenus
Tintinnidium of genus Tintinnidium with T. fl uviatile and T . pusillum .

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 51
ancestor had longitudinal somatic ciliary rows com-
posed of dikinetids bearing only one cilium, which is
associated with the anterior basal body (Fig. 3.3 a).
During cell division, the opisthe ’ s oral ciliature devel-
oped on the cell surface, as it is common in ciliates, and
originated de novo , i.e. without involving previously
existing ciliature (epiapokinetal stomatogenesis; Foiss-
ner 1996 ). Simultaneously, a replication band – the
site of DNA duplication – traversed each macronucleus
nodule before division (Deroux 1974; Salvano 1 974,
1975 ; Raikov 1982 ).
The ancestor of the halteriids, oligotrichids,
and choreotrichids
Entering the pelagic zone and obtaining a planktonic
life style apparently coincided with some serious
morphologic changes, a “ dorsalization ” . Foissner et al.
(2004) suggested that the fl attened ventral side of the
ancestor with the cirri was reduced, whereas the dorsal
side with the longitudinal somatic kineties became
enlarged (character 2 ). As the result of this “ dorsaliza-
tion ” process, the ciliates were no longer dorsoventrally
fl attened but rather had a globular, ellipsoidal, or
obconical cell shape (character 1 ). The cells developed
an apically located adoral zone of membranelles (char-
acter 3 ), which became also responsible for swimming,
as the somatic cilia (the dorsal cilia of the ancestor)
were minute and possibly had only a sensory function
(Faur é - Fremiet & Ganier 1970 ) or became involved in
lorica construction (Chapter 2 ; Laval - Peuto & Brown-
lee 1986 ). Possibly, the “ dorsalization ” process also
resulted in the enantiotropic division mode (character
40) because the ventral side comprising the area for the
opisthe ’ s oral apparatus was reduced (Foissner 1996 ;
Agatha 2004b ; Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke 2007 ). There-
fore, the voluminous oral ciliature probably obtained
an inverse orientation in the unciliated posterior cell
Fig. 3.3 Kinetal maps showing the evolution of somatic portion, as in halteriids, and fi nally invaginated in oli-
ciliary patterns in the tintinnid ancestors (reprinted from gotrichids and choreotrichids (see below).
Agatha, S. & Str ü der - Kypke, M.C. ( 2007 ) Phylogeny of the Although the membranelles gradually decrease in
order Choreotrichida (Ciliophora, Spirotricha, Oligotrichea)
size towards the cytostome in stichotrichs, a bipartition
as inferred from morphology, ultrastructure, ontogenesis,
of the adoral zone of membranelles into a portion with
and SSrRNA gene sequences. European Journal of
large collar membranelles and small buccal mem-
Protistology, 43, 37 – 63: Fig. 1a, with permission from
branelles characterized the ancestor of the halteriids,
Elsevier; protargol stain). (a) Ancestor of stichotrichs,
halteriids, oligotrichids, and choreotrichids. oligotrichids, and choreotrichids (character 8 ). Simul-
(b)Strombidinopsis . The somatic dikinetids have two cilia. taneously, the somatic kineties that extended longitu-
(c) Hypothetical tintinnid ancestor. BM, buccal dinally between the adoral zone of membranelles and
membranelle; CM, collar membranelles; LF, left ciliary fi eld; the posterior cell end in stichotrichs were shortened
RF, right ciliary fi eld; SK, somatic kineties. posteriorly and/or anteriorly (character 15). This was

52 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
the time when the ancestor of the halteriids branched characteristics of ciliated and unciliated basal bodies,
off according to cladistic analyses. The large number namely those basal bodies that bear a cilium stain more
of special features indicates a high evolution rate in intensely. Thus, occasionally only the ciliated basal
halteriids (Agatha 2004b ; Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke body of dikinetids is distinct, suggesting the presence
2007 ; Agatha & Foissner 2009 ). of monokinetids. Atypical observations should hence
be verifi ed by transmission electron microscopy. Fur-
thermore, it is important which dikinetidal basal bodies
The ancestor of the oligotrichids and
are ciliated: both, only the anterior, or only the poste-
choreotrichids
rior. Unfortunately, these characters were not always
mentioned in species descriptions.
In the ancestor of the oligotrichids and choreotrichids,
During the fi rst phase of choreotrichid evolution,
the generation of the opisthe ’ s C - shaped adoral zone
primarily the structure of the somatic kinetids changed,
of membranelles was transferred into a tube - shaped
whereas the second phase was mainly characterized by
invagination (hypoapokinetal stomatogenesis; charac-
an increase in complexity of the somatic ciliary pat-
ter 41). Additionally, the paroral membrane on the
terns. The ancestor of the choreotrichids probably had
outer surface of the buccal lip was lost (character 10;
ten or more somatic kineties composed of dikinetids
Agatha 2004a ).
(character 14). In contrast to the stichotrichs, halteri-
ids, and oligotrichids, which have cilia only at each
The ancestor of the choreotrichids anterior dikinetidal basal body (for details, see Agatha
2004a, b, 2011 ), the choreotrichid ancestor probably
The ancestor of the aloricate choreotrichids and tintin- had cilia associated with both basal bodies (character
nids was probably characterized by a circular arrange- 26; Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke 2007, 2012 ). Such a
ment of the large collar membranelles on an elevated diciliated kinetid structure is still found in the extant
rim around the peristomial fi eld containing the eccen- aloricate genera Strombidinopsis , Parastrombidinopsis ,
tric buccal cavity (character 4 ). Some collar mem- andParastrombidium (Fig. 3.3 b) and represents a key-
branelles, which are equally sized in the halteriids and stone for understanding the evolution not only within
oligo trichids, became proximally elongated, plunging the aloricate choreotrichids (Section 3.7 ), but also in
into the buccal cavity (character 8 ). The small buccal the tintinnids.
membranelles became inconspicuous as they were
transferred into the funnel - shaped buccal cavity. A
single - rowed endoral membrane with rather long cilia The early evolution within the tintinnids
extended across the peristomial fi eld, entering the
buccal cavity. Although the endoral membrane is usu- The main and most conspicuous synapomorphy of
ally not visible owing to the perilemma cover, its move- the tintinnids is, of course, the lorica, the vase - shaped
ments are occasionally recognizable (Fig. 4.2 ). The or tube - shaped house (character 38). As we have
adoral zone of membranelles of the opisthe developed already seen, it has been used to defi ne tintinnids for a
in an invagination, which became pouch - shaped long time. The ciliate is attached to the inner lorica wall
(character 41). This change was probably correlated by a contractile peduncle (character 33). Contractility
with the creation of a circular adoral zone. is a rare feature in the taxa under consideration. It
Two feature complexes were found to be most valu- occurs only in the tail of the oligotrichid tontoniids,
able in the reconstruction of evolution within the such as Tontonia appendiculariformis (Faur é - Fremiet
choreotrichids, and especially the tintinnids (Section 1924 ). However, the ultrastructure of the contractile
3.5 ): the structure of the somatic kinetids (monoki- tail in tontoniids is very different from the myonemes
netids or dikinetids) and the somatic ciliary patterns. in tintinnids; thus, the tontoniid tail probably repre-
In the following, we will see that the differentiation sents a homoplasy (Laval 1972 ; Hedin 1976b ; Greuet
between both kinetid states is important, but the states et al. 1986 ; Wasik & Miko ł ajczyk 1992 ). The somatic
are often diffi cult to distinguish owing to the minute- ciliary pattern of the tintinnid ancestor probably com-
ness of the organelles: monokinetids are about 0.26 μ m prised more than ten somatic kineties arranged in two
across, dikinetids about 0.5 μ m × 0.26 μ m in size. A ciliary fi elds on the right and left cell sides, separated
further problem is caused by the different staining by an unciliated ventral stripe (character 19). Both

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 53
fi elds differed in the spacing of their ciliary rows, i.e. rence is correlated with food availability (Chapter 4 ;
the kineties of the left ciliary fi eld were more closely Entz Jr 1909b ; Capriulo et al. 1986 ).
spaced than those of the right ciliary fi eld (Figs 3.3 c, The vesicular reticulum probably represents a cor-
3.4 a, and 3.7 a; Snyder & Brownlee 1991 ; Agatha & tical structure characteristic of tintinnids (character
Riedel- Lorj é 2006 ). The anterior cilia were reduced in 37; Sokolova & Gerassimova 1984 ). It was found in
the posterior dikinetids (character 26). Cyttarocylis and P arafavella , in which it comprises
Capsules represent a further synapomorphy (char- cortical cavities that communicate with each other
acter 29). They are membrane- b ound, exocytotic cell and the pericellular space underneath the perilemma
organelles (extrusomes). However, to our knowledge, (Laval - Peuto 1975 ; Sokolova & Gerassimova 1984 ;
ejection has never been observed; so, their extrusive Sokolova et al. 1986 ).
character was merely inferred from their location on Descending from the tintinnid ancestor, two lineages
or between the oral ciliature (see below) and the invari- diverged: one comprises the mainly freshwater genera
able orientation of the ampoule - shaped organelles Tintinnidium and M embranicola and the freshwater
with the tip directed to the cell membrane. Extrusomes species Tintinnopsis cylindrata, the other comprises
are widely distributed in protists (Hausmann 1978 ). the remaining, mainly marine tintinnids (Agatha &
They are attached to the inner side of the cell mem- Str ü der - Kypke 2007 ). We will follow the track of evo-
brane and are extruded in fractions of a second. Some lution in the two lineages separately (see below).
of the extrusome types are used in defence or to attack
prey organisms. They act like mini - harpoons or the
nematocysts of Cnidaria (which are not cell organelles, Freshwater species
but whole cells). The ultrastructure of tintinnid cap-
sules differs from possibly extrusive granules in some Cladistic analyses show an early branching of the
stichotrichs and aloricate choreotrichids and the genera Tintinnidium and Membranicola and the species
needle- shaped extrusomes (trichites) in the closely Tintinnopsis cylindrata (Fig. 3.2 ). In their ancestor, two
related oligotrichids (Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke 2007 , ventral organelles were probably introduced on the
Agatha 2004b , and references therein). Both trichites ventral side between the right and left ciliary fi elds (Fig.
and capsules are regarded as apomorphies. 3.4 b; character 20). These ventral organelles are com-
Five types of tintinnid capsule have been distin- posed of dikinetids and have a special origin, namely
guished based on characteristics revealed by transmis- they apparently develop d e novo (without contact to
sion electron microscopy (Laval - Peuto & Barria de Cao parental ciliary structures) during morphogenesis
1987 ), but only two types occur in the species cladis- (Foissner & Wilbert 1979 ; Petz & Foissner 1993 ; Foiss-
tically analyzed here: type I capsule in the genus ner et al. 1999 ), whereas somatic kineties develop by
Tintinnopsis and type II in the genera Codonella , Codonel- intrakinetal proliferation of basal bodies in stichotrichs
lopsis , Dictyocysta , and Stenosemella (character 31). and oligotrichids (for the d e novo origin and reorganiza-
The capsules are assumed to be always associated with tion of the somatic ciliature in halteriids, see below).
organelles recognizable in live cells and scanning elec- The loricae are soft and have agglomerated some bio-
tron micrographs: striae, accessory combs, and ten- genic and abiogenic particles (mineral particles, diatom
taculoids (Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke 2007 , 2012 , frustules or their fragments, etc.; character 38; Chapter
Agatha & Tsai 2 008 , and references therein). The ten- 2 ); thus, they resemble the mineral envelope of the
taculoids were observed in several tintinnids (charac- aloricate choreotrichid Strombidinopsis minima , which
ter 34; Figs 2.2d , 2.12c , e, and 4.2b , c; for details, see is, however, directly attached to the cell surface (Agatha
Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke 2007 , 2012 ). Their move- 2003 and references therein). The fi rst somatic ciliary
ment roughly follows that of the collar membranelles, pattern produced in this branch was probably similar
which extend almost perpendicularly to the main cell to that of Tintinnidium fl uviatile and T. pusillum (Figs
axis in swimming specimens and bend towards the 3.4 b and 3.5 a – c).
peristomial fi eld in disturbed cells; according to Subsequently, two lineages split within the tintinnids
Laval - Peuto (1994) , the tentaculoids are contractile. with soft loricae by (1) the partial loss of the unciliated
Observations concerning the presence of capsules, anterior basal bodies in the posterior dikinetids, creat-
striae, accessory combs, and tentaculoids are occa- ing a pattern found in Tintinnidium semiciliatum (Figs
sionally contradictory, possibly because their occur- 3.4 c and 3.5 d, e), and ( 2 ) the loss of all anterior cilia

Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 3.4 Kinetal maps showing the evolution of somatic ciliary patterns in tintinnids with two dikinetidal ventral organelles
(a, reprinted from Agatha, S. & Str ü der - Kypke, M.C. ( 2007 ) Phylogeny of the order Choreotrichida (Ciliophora, Spirotricha,
Oligotrichea) as inferred from morphology, ultrastructure, ontogenesis, and SSrRNA gene sequences. European Journal of
Protistology, 43, 37 – 63: Fig. 1e, with permission from Elsevier; b, e, adapted from Foissner, W. & Wilbert, N. ( 1979 )
Morphologie, Infraciliatur und Ö kologie der limnischen Tintinnina: T intinnidium fl uviatile Stein, T intinnidium pusillum Entz,
Tintinnopsis cylindrata Daday und C odonella cratera (Leidy) (Ciliophora, Polyhymenophora). Journal of Protozoology, 26,
90 – 103: Figs 2 and 6; c, adapted from Blatterer, H. & Foissner, W. ( 1990 ) Beiträge zur Ciliatenfauna (Protozoa: Ciliophora) der
Amper (Bayern, Bundesrepublik Deutschland). Archiv f ü r Protistenkunde, 138, 93 – 115: Fig, 4b, with permission from
Elsevier; d, adapted from Foissner et al. 1999 ; protargol stain). (a) Hypothetical tintinnid ancestor. (b) Two ventral organelles
were introduced, resulting in the pattern of T intinnidium ( Tintinnidium ). (c) The unciliated anterior dikinetidal basal bodies
were partly lost in the posterior parts of the kineties, giving rise to the pattern of T intinnidium ( Semitintinnidium ). (d) The
anterior cilia of all dikinetids were lost, producing the M embranicola pattern. (e) The unciliated anterior dikinetidal basal
bodies were lost, creating the pattern of Tintinnopsis cylindrata . CM, collar membranelles; LF, left ciliary fi eld; OP, oral
primordium; RF, right ciliary fi eld; VO, ventral organelles.

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 55
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 3.5 Tintinnids with two dikinetidal ventral organelles (a, c, adapted from Foissner, W. & Wilbert, N. ( 1979 ) Morphologie,
Infraciliatur und Ö kologie der limnischen Tintinnina: T intinnidium fl uviatile Stein, T intinnidium pusillum Entz, T intinnopsis
cylindrata Daday und C odonella cratera (Leidy) (Ciliophora, Polyhymenophora). Journal of Protozoology, 26, 90 – 103: Figs 1
and 3; b, from Foissner et al. ( 1991 ) © Bayerisches Landesamt fur Umwelt; d, e, reprinted from Blatterer, H. & Foissner, W.
( 1990 ) Beitr ä ge zur Ciliatenfauna (Protozoa: Ciliophora) der Amper (Bayern, Bundesrepublik Deutschland). Archiv für
Protistenkunde, 138, 93 – 115: Figs 4c, d, with permission from Elsevier; protargol stain). (a, b) T intinnidium ( Tintinnidium )
pusillum , 155 μ m, 160 μ m. (c) T intinnidium ( Tintinnidium ) fl uviatile , 210 μ m. (d, e) T intinnidium ( Semitintinnidium ) semiciliatum ,
50 μ m. The unciliated anterior dikinetidal basal bodies were partly lost in the posterior parts of the kineties. LF, left ciliary
fi eld; RF, right ciliary fi eld; VO, ventral organelles.
in the dikinetids, producing theMembranicola pattern minal membrane in its lorica, to which the ciliate’ s
(Figs 3.4 d and 3.6 a, b; character 26). The differences peduncle is attached (character 38; Foissner et al.
in the somatic ciliary patterns of T intinnidium fl uviatile 1999 ). The Membranicola pattern apparently gave rise
andT. pusillum on the one hand and T intinnidium semi- to theTintinnopsis cylindrata pattern with its monoki-
ciliatum on the other were used by Agatha & Str ü der - netidal somatic ciliary rows (Figs 3 .4e and 3 .6c , d).
Kypke (2007) to establish two subgenera within the Mainly because of the presence of two ventral
genus Tintinnidium. The rather recently been described organelles, the somatic ciliary pattern of T. cylindrata
freshwater genus Membranicola has a unique subter- differs from that of its congeners (Fig. 3.10 c) and

56 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
resembles that of the Tintinnidium species; further-
more, its lorica is soft. Despite these discrepancies, the
generic affi liation of T intinnopsis cylindrata cannot be
changed at the moment, as the ciliary pattern of the
type species of the genus Tintinnopsis , T. beroidea , is
Publisher's Note: Publisher's Note:
unknown (Agatha & Riedel - Lorj é 2006 ).
Image not available Image not available
in the electronic edition in the electronic edition
Marine species
I n the second lineage originating from the tintinnid
ancestor, we fi nd all remaining taxa, namely, all marine
tintinnids and the freshwater species Stenosemella
lacustris and Codonella cratera. The generic affi liations
of the last two species are doubtful (Agatha & Tsai
2 008; Agatha 2 010a) . The main synapomorphy of
this lineage is the introduction of a specialized monoki-
netidal ventral kinety between the right and left ciliary
fi elds (Fig. 3 .7b ; character 20). In contrast to the
ventral organelles of the previous lineage, this ciliary
row originates as common, namely, by intrakinetal
proliferation of basal bodies. Simultaneously, the diki-
netids of the right and left ciliary fi elds, except for
Publisher's Note:
the anteriormost ones, became ciliated monokinetids
Image not available
(character 26), producing a pattern found in the extant
in the electronic edition
genus N olaclusilis (Figs 3.7 b and 3.8 a, b). The members
of this genus have unique protrusions near the adoral
zone of membranelles that are attached to the bell -
shaped loricae and used to close the lorica opening. The
lorica walls are hyaline and apparently monolami-
nar and compact (character 38; Sniezek et al. 1 991;
Snyder & Brownlee 1991 ).
N ext, two dorsal kineties evolved between the right
and left ciliary fi elds (character 23). A monokinetidal
or dikinetidal structure of the dorsal kineties and cilia
at the anterior, posterior, or even at both dikinetidal
basal bodies were reported (Foissner & O ’ Donoghue
1990 ; Choi et al. 1992 ; Agatha & Tsai 2008 ); electron
Fig. 3.6 Tintinnids with two dikinetidal ventral organelles microscopic studies are required to confi rm these
(a, b, adapted from Foissner et al. 1999 ; c, adapted from confl icting observations. The pattern created matches
Foissner, W. & Wilbert, N. ( 1979 ) Morphologie, Infraciliatur that of E utintinnus species (Figs 3.7 c and 3.8 c – h; Choi
und Ö kologie der limnischen Tintinnina: T intinnidium et al. 1992 ). In this genus, some variation is observed
fl uviatile Stein, T intinnidium pusillum Entz, T intinnopsis in the position and shape of the ventral kineties. The
cylindrata Daday und C odonella cratera (Leidy) (Ciliophora,
loricae of E utintinnus species are hyaline and tube -
Polyhymenophora). Journal of Protozoology, 26, 90 – 103:
s haped with an anterior and posterior opening (Figs
Fig. 5; d, from Foissner et al. ( 1991 ) © Bayerisches
2.1c and 2.13g ); the wall is monolaminar and compact.
Landesamt fur Umwelt; protargol stain). (a, b) Membranicola
tamari , 42 μ m. Merely the posterior dikinetidal basal bodies By the introduction of a lateral ciliary fi eld (charac-
are ciliated. (c, d) T intinnopsis cylindrata , 97 μ m, 97 μ m. The ter 25), the complexity of the somatic ciliary pattern
somatic kineties are composed of ciliated monokinetids. LF, further increased. In contrast to the right and left
left ciliary fi eld; RF, right ciliary fi eld; VO, ventral organelles. ciliary fi elds with their anterior dikinetids, this fi eld

Fig. 3.7 Kinetal maps showing the evolution of somatic ciliary patterns in tintinnids with a monokinetidal ventral kinety
(a, adapted from Agatha, S. & Str ü der - Kypke, M.C. ( 2007 ) Phylogeny of the order Choreotrichida (Ciliophora, Spirotricha,
Oligotrichea) as inferred from morphology, ultrastructure, ontogenesis, and SSrRNA gene sequences. European Journal of
Protistology, 43, 37 – 63: Fig. 1e; b, adapted from Snyder, R.A. & Brownlee, D.C. ( 1991 ) N olaclusilis bicornis n. g., n. sp.
(Tintinnina: Tintinnidiidae): a tintinnine ciliate with novel lorica and cell morphology from the Chesapeake Bay estuary.
Journal of Protozoology, 38, 583 – 589: Fig. 4; c, adapted from Choi, J.K., Coats, D.W., Brownlee, D.C. & Small, E.B. ( 1992)
Morphology and infraciliature of three species of E utintinnus (Ciliophora; Tintinnina) with guidelines for interpreting
protargol- s tained tintinnine ciliates. Journal of Protozoology, 39, 80 – 92: Fig. 3c; d, adapted from Kim, S.Y., Yang, E.J., Gong, J.
& Choi, J.K. (2 010 ) Redescription of F avella ehrenbergii (Clapar è de and Lachmann, 1858) J ö rgensen, 1924 (Ciliophora:
Choreotrichia), with phylogenetic analyses based on small subunit rRNA gene sequences. Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology,
57, 460–467: Fig. 13; protargol stain). (a) Hypothetical tintinnid ancestor. (b) N olaclusilis . A ventral kinety was created and
the dikinetids, except for the anteriormost ones, transformed into monokinetids. (c) E utintinnus . Two dorsal kineties developed.
(d) Favella ehrenbergii . A monokinetidal lateral ciliary fi eld was introduced. BM, buccal membranelle; CM, collar membranelles;
DK, dorsal kineties; LA, lateral ciliary fi eld; LF, left ciliary fi eld; OP, oral primordium; RF, right ciliary fi eld; VK, ventral kinety.

Fig. 3.8 Tintinnids with a monokinetidal ventral kinety (a, adapted from Snyder, R.A. & Brownlee, D.C. ( 1991 ) N olaclusilis
bicornis n. g., n. sp. (Tintinnina: Tintinnidiidae): a tintinnine ciliate with novel lorica and cell morphology from the Chesapeake
Bay estuary. Journal of Protozoology, 38, 583 – 589: Fig. 2; b, adapted from Sniezek, J.H., Capriulo, G.M., Small, E.B. & Russo,
A. ( 1991) N olaclusilis hudsonicus n. sp. (Nolaclusiliidae n. fam.) a bilaterally symmetrical tintinnine ciliate from the lower
Hudson River estuary. Journal of Protozoology, 38, 589 – 594: Fig. 1; c – h, adapted from Choi, J.K., Coats, D.W., Brownlee, D.C.
& Small, E.B. (1 992 ) Morphology and infraciliature of three species of E utintinnus (Ciliophora; Tintinnina) with guidelines for
interpreting protargol - stained tintinnine ciliates. Journal of Protozoology, 39, 80 – 92: Fig. 4a; protargol stain). (a, b)
Nolaclusilis bicornis and N. hudsonicus , 26 μ m, 38 μ m. (c – h) E utintinnus pectinis (c, d), E . tenuis (e, f), and E . angustatus (g, h)
have two dorsal kineties, 88 μ m, 88 μ m, 125 μ m, 130 μ m, 93 μ m, 90 μ m. DK, dorsal kineties; K2, second kinety (fi rst row of
RF; which commences often more posteriorly and/or with more than one dikinetid) ; KF, kinety fragment; LF, left ciliary fi eld;
RF, right ciliary fi eld; VK, ventral kinety.

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 59
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 3.9 Tintinnids with ventral kineties, lateral ciliary fi elds, and dorsal kineties (a, b, adapted from Kim, S.Y., Yang, E.J.,
Gong, J. & Choi, J.K. ( 2010 ) Redescription of F avella ehrenbergii (Clapar è de and Lachmann, 1858 ) J ö rgensen, 1924 (Ciliophora:
Choreotrichia), with phylogenetic analyses based on small subunit rRNA gene sequences. Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology,
57, 460 – 467: Fig. 15; c, d, adapted from Cai et al. 2006 ; e, f, adapted from Agatha, S. & Str ü der - Kypke, M.C. ( 2012)
Reconciling cladistic and genetic analyses in choreotrichid ciliates (Protists, Spirotrichea, Oligotrichea). Journal of Eukaryotic
Microbiology (in press). g, h, adapted from Foissner, W. & Wilbert, N. ( 1979 ) Morphologie, Infraciliatur und Ö kologie der
limnischen Tintinnina: Tintinnidium fl uviatile Stein, T intinnidium pusillum Entz, T intinnopsis cylindrata Daday und C odonella
cratera (Leidy) (Ciliophora, Polyhymenophora). Journal of Protozoology, 26, 90 – 103: Fig. 9; protargol stain). (a, b) F avella
ehrenbergii , 142 μ m. (c, d) T intinnopsis brasiliensis , 58 μ m. (e, f) Schmidingerella arcuata (Brandt, 1906 ) Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke,
2012 , 75 μ m. (g, h) Codonella cratera , 70 μ m. DK, dorsal kinety/ies; LA, lateral ciliary fi eld; LF, left ciliary fi eld; PK, posterior
kinety; RF, right ciliary fi eld; VK, ventral kinety.
is exclusively composed of monokinetids. Even if the is found in Tintinnopsis brasiliensis (Fig. 3 .9c , d; Cai
structure of the anterior kinetids is not clearly recog- et al. 2006 ). As indicated by the generic affi liation, the
nizable in protargol preparations, the closer distances species has a hard, agglomerated lorica, which repre-
of the kinetids and ciliary rows in the lateral ciliary sents the fi rst time this lorica type is formed by tin-
fi eld facilitate its separation from the left ciliary fi eld. tinnids. Besides T. brasiliensis, two further lineages
The pattern generated corresponds to that of Favella probably developed after the loss of one dorsal kinety.
ehrenbergii and F . panamensis (Figs 3.7 d and 3.9 a, b; I n the second lineage, the right ciliary fi eld sepa-
Kim S.Y. et al. 2010 ; Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke 2012 ). rated from the ventral kinety, which got a unique
Like the previous two genera, F. ehrenbergii has a dikinetidal posterior portion, producing the pattern of
hyaline lorica, but its wall is monolaminar with alveoli Schmi dingerella arcuata (characters 21, 22; Agatha &
(Figs 2.14b and 3.16 d). Str ü der - Kypke 2012 ). Although the loricae of the
N ext, one of the formerly two dorsal kineties was lost genus Favella and S. arcuata are very similar at fi rst
(character 23). The ancestor of the remaining tintin- glance owing to their hyaline, monolaminar walls
nids, thus, possessed a right, left, and lateral ciliary with alveoli, careful live observation at 1000 × magni-
fi eld as well as a ventral and dorsal kinety. This pattern fi cation and scanning electron micrographs revealed

Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 3.10 Kinetal maps of tintinnids with ventral and dorsal kineties and lateral ciliary fi elds ( a, adapted from Kim, S.Y.,
Yang, E.J., Gong, J. & Choi, J.K. ( 2010 ) Redescription of F avella ehrenbergii (Clapar è de and Lachmann, 1858 ) J ö rgensen, 1924
(Ciliophora: Choreotrichia), with phylogenetic analyses based on small subunit rRNA gene sequences. Journal of Eukaryotic
Microbiology, 57, 460–467: Fig. 13; b, adapted from Agatha, S. & Str ü der - Kypke, M.C. ( 2012 ) Reconciling cladistic and
genetic analyses in choreotrichid ciliates (Protists, Spirotrichea, Oligotrichea). Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology (in press);
c, adapted from Agatha 2010b ; protargol stain). (a) F avella ehrenbergii . (b) S chmidingerella arcuata . (c) Tintinnopsis parvula . Most
complex pattern with a posterior kinety. BM, buccal membranelle; CM, collar membranelles; DK, dorsal kinety/ kineties; LA,
lateral ciliary fi eld; LF, left ciliary fi eld; OP, oral primordium; PK, posterior kinety; RF, right ciliary fi eld; VK, ventral kinety.

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 61
deviations: the wall has pores and surface ridges in S. The lorica s ac
arcuata (Figs 2.14a and 3.17 d, e), absent in F avella
(Figs 2.14b and 3.16 c). The differences in the lorica The lorica sac represents a recently discovered synapo-
walls and the somatic ciliary patterns and the distant morphy of the genera C odonella , Codonellopsis , Codo-
positions in the gene trees (Figs 3.9 e, f , 3.10 b, and naria , and Dictyocysta (Fig. 2.2b – d; Agatha 2010a ).
3.13 ) justify not only a separation of the species on The last two genera were, however, not cladistically
genus level, but also an affi liation of the genera with analyzed owing to the scarcity of cytological data. In
different tintinnid families, namely, the Rhabdonellidae these four genera, the ciliate cell is not only surrounded
and Ptychocylididae. by the lorica, but also by a membranous sac that lines
In the third lineage, a posterior kinety was intro- the lorica. Apically, the sac merges into a foldable
duced, creating the most complex tintinnid ciliary closing apparatus that shuts the lorica opening in
pattern so far known (Fig. 3 .10c ; character 24), com- disturbed/contracted specimens. On the other hand,
prising a right, left, and lateral ciliary fi eld as well as a the diaphragm- l ike apparatuses in the genera Salping-
ventral, dorsal, and posterior kinety. A monokinetidal acantha and Salpingella are probably not homologous
or dikinetidal structure of the posterior kinety and cilia to the foldable ones (Agatha 2 010a) . As mentioned
at the anterior, posterior, or even at both dikinetidal earlier, the generic affi liation of C odonella cratera is
basal bodies were reported (Foissner & Wilbert 1979 ; doubtful, as a lorica sac was not reported in this com-
Foissner & O ’ Donoghue 1990 ; Agatha & Tsai 2008 ). paratively well - known freshwater species (Section 3.6 ;
Electron microscopic studies are needed to verify these Foissner et al. 1999 ; Agatha 2010a ). Likewise, the
confl icting observations. The complex somatic ciliary generic assignment of Stenosemella lacustris is incor-
pattern occurs with minute deviations in a wide variety rect because the lorica collar is not hyaline but agglom-
of taxa: in the genera Codonella (Fig. 3.9g , h) and Tin- erated and lacks windows (Foissner & O ’ Donoghue
tinnopsis (Fig. 3.11 i – l; for T . cylindrata, see page 5 5) 1990 ; Agatha & Tsai 2008 ). The hard, entirely agglom-
with hard, agglomerated loricae; in the genera Codonel- erated lorica thus unites S. lacustris (Fig. 3.11 e, f) with
lopsis (Fig. 3.11 g, h) and S tenosemella (Fig. 3.11 m, n; thoseTintinnopsis species that have the most complex
forS. lacustris , see below) with loricae composed of a somatic ciliary pattern (the somatic ciliary pattern of
hyaline collar and an agglomerated bowl, and the Tintinnopsis cylindrata resembles that of the Tintinnid-
genus Cymatocylis (Fig. 3.11 a – d) with hyaline loricae. ium species and Tintinnopsis brasiliensis lacks a poste-
The subtle deviations in the somatic ciliary patterns rior kinety).
concern the following: (1) the course of the ventral
kinety; (2) the number of dikinetids at the anterior end
and the position of the fi rst and second kinety in the Cladistic a nalysis
right ciliary fi eld (numbering in clockwise direction in
top view; Chatton et al. 1 931) ; (3) the course of the The Hennigian argumentation involved 56 characters,
last kinety of the lateral ciliary fi eld; (4) the structure mainly those of morphology, ultrastructure, cell divi-
of the dorsal kinety; (5) the structure, position, and sion, conjugation, and resting cysts (Table 3.2 ). The
course of the posterior kinety; and (6) the occurrence apomorphic character states were used to infer rela-
of fragmented kineties. Unfortunately, most studies so tionships, applying the parsimony principle, by which
far have ignored these differences although they prob- the simplest solution with the fewest homoplasies
ably represent taxonomically relevant features. and evolutionary steps is preferred [primers for this
approach are found in Lipscomb ( 1998) and Futuyma
(2009) ; details are provided by Felsenstein (2004) ].
The capsule t ypes Although the ancestral and derived character states
are simply coded in the Hennigian argumentation
Among the tintinnids with the most complex ciliary method (fi rst or only code in Table 3.2 ), the computer
pattern, the cladogram shows a grouping of Stenose- programs require a special procedure for character
mella pacifi ca with the genera C odonella and C odonel- state trees. The bifurcations during character develop-
lopsis . They are united by the same types of capsules ment are translated into several binary codes [second
and mucocysts (membrane- b ound extrusome with a codes in Table 3.2 ; for coding of multistate characters,
paracrystalline structure that forms a mucus- l ike mass see Lipscomb (1992) ]. Accordingly, these character
after ejection; Laval - Peuto & Barria de Cao 1987 ). state trees form several columns in Table 3.3 and not

Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 3.11 Tintinnids with the most complex somatic ciliary pattern, comprising a ventral, dorsal and posterior kinety as well
as a right, left, and lateral ciliary fi eld (a – d, g, h, adapted from Petz et al. 1995 ; e, f, adapted from Foissner & O ’ Donoghue
1990 , CSIRO Publishing, http://www.publish.csiro.au/nid/120/paper/IT9890661.htm ; i, j, adapted from Agatha & Riedel -
Lorj é 2006 ; k, l, adapted from Agatha 2008 ; m, n, adapted from Agatha, S. & Tsai, S. - F. ( 2008 ) Redescription of the tintinnid
Stenosemella pacifi ca Kofoid and Campbell, 1929 (Ciliophora, Spirotricha) based on live observation, protargol impregnation,
and scanning electron microscopy. Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, 55, 75 – 85: Fig. 67; protargol stain). (a, b) C ymatocylis
convallaria , 74 μ m. (c, d) C ymatocylis calyciformis , 125 μ m. (e, f) S tenosemella lacustris , 32 μ m. (g, h) C odonellopsis glacialis ,
57 μ m. (i, j) T intinnopsis cylindrica , 85 μ m. (k, l) T intinnopsis fi mbriata , 24 μ m. (m, n) S tenosemella pacifi ca , 36 μ m. DK, dorsal
kinety; LA, lateral ciliary fi eld; LF, left ciliary fi eld; PK, posterior kinety; RF, right ciliary fi eld; VK, ventral kinety.

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 63
Fig. 3.12 The monophyletic branch of the choreotrichid ciliates in the maximum parsimony tree of the Oligotrichea
computed with Hennig86, using the stichotrichs as outgroup (adapted from Agatha, S. & Str ü der - Kypke, M.C. ( 2012 )
Reconciling cladistic and genetic analyses in choreotrichid ciliates (Protists, Spirotrichea, Oligotrichea). Journal of Eukaryotic
Microbiology, in press). For character coding, see Tables 3.2 and 3.3 . The tree is the 50% majority - rule consent of 100 trees
(length = 164, consistency index = 75, retention index = 93). Numbers on the branches are the bootstrap values (percentage
out of 10 replicates) for the congruent internal nodes calculated with PAUP * version 4.0b10 (Swofford 2002 ) . Black squares
mark the main apomorphies.
only a single one as typical. Hence, the data matrix Codonellopsis , and S tenosemella (excluding S . l acustris )
for computer analyses comprises 76 characters ( = owing to the capsule type is not recognizable.
columns). The computer program fi rst searches for the
shortest trees, which are according to the parsimony
principle the most likely ones. Next, a consensus tree is Conclusions
calculated displaying only those branches occurring in
all or most trees (Fig. 3.12 ). The fi nal tree thus shows The cladistic analysis shows the following.
besides the unquestionable bifurcations unresolved 1. Most freshwater tintinnids are characterized by a
relationships in form of polytomies (multiple branch- somatic ciliary pattern comprising a right and left
ing of a common ancestor). ciliary fi eld and two d e novo originating dikinetidal
The cladogram (Fig. 3.2 ) clearly demonstrates the ventral organelles.
separation of tintinnids with two dikinetidal ventral 2. The structure of the somatic kinetids is highly vari-
organelles (e.g., Tintinnidium ) from those with a able in tintinnids with two ventral organelles, but the
monokinetidal ventral kinety (e.g., E utintinnus , Favella ), complexity of the patterns is low.
which is not recognizable in the computed tree (Fig. 3. The structure of the somatic kinetids apparently
3.12 ). Likewise, a clustering of the genera C odonella , changed rapidly and then remained constant in

64 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
tintinnids with a ventral kinety, whereas the com- and their distribution among the taxa analyzed.
plexity increased distinctly by the introduction of Although the pure tree only refl ects the relationships
specialized kineties and ciliary fi elds. of the taxa, the combination of the cladogram with the
4. Hyaline and hard, agglomerated loricae do not databases provides the reader with information about
form distinct evolutionary lineages, whereas soft, the occurrence and changes of character states during
agglomerated loricae are characteristic of most fresh- the evolution of the organisms. To show how to read a
water tintinnids, and loricae composed of a hyaline cladogram and how to infer this additional informa-
collar and an agglomerated bowl group rather well tion, we use the tintinnid tree shown in Fig. 3.2 as well
together. as the Tables 3.2 and 3.3 . Each of the black squares on
5. The capsule types, the lorica sac with its closing the branches marks an apomorphy or synapomorphy;
apparatus, and the hypothesis about somatic ciliary the associated number indicates the character, fol-
pattern development, represent the most important lowed by its state as given in Table 3.2 .
features/feature complexes for the reconstruction of On our way through the cladogram starting with
evolution among tintinnids. the genus Codonellopsis , for instance, we pass several
6. The genus Tintinnopsis is paraphyletic (not all black squares. The most important apomorphies will
descendents of the last common ancestor fall in this be discussed. The fi rst square has associated the
taxon). number 28 - 3 and is additionally marked by an aster-
isk indicating a homoplasy. Using Table 3.2 , we see
that Codonellopsis has more than two macronucleus
3.4 HOW TO READ THE TINTINNID nodules, a character state that independently devel-
CLADOGRAM oped in Eutintinnus . Furthermore, we recognize that
two macronucleus nodules are the plesiomorphic
Cladograms are the graphic result of a cladistic analy- (ancestral) character state and that there are two
sis, which is again based on the interpretation of many further apomorphic character states, namely the pres-
morphologic, ontogenetic, and ultrastructural data ence of an ellipsoidal and a C - shaped macronucleus
Table 3.2 Character states and coding used for the construction of a cladogram built by the Hennigian argumentation (fi rst
or only code; Fig. 3.2 ) and for computer analyses (only or second code; Fig. 3.12 ). The coding is mainly based on the outgroup
comparison with the stichotrichs. If not stated otherwise, the characters are ordered/additive (the states have a certain
sequence; Wagner/Farris optimization).
Character states
Apomorphy Plesiomorphy
1 Cell shape usually globular to obconical (coded 1) Cell shape usually distinctly
dorsoventrally fl attened (coded 0)
2 Usually planktonic (coded 1) Usually benthic (coded 0)
3 Adoral zone of membranelles mainly apical (coded 1) Adoral zone of membranelles mainly
ventral (coded 0)
4 Adoral zone of membranelles circular (coded 1) or secondarily with Adoral zone of membranelles
minute ventral gap (coded 2) C-shaped (coded 0)
5 30–50% (coded 1) or 0% (coded 2) of adoral polykinetids composed >90% of adoral polykinetids
of four rows of basal bodies composed of four rows of basal
bodies (coded 0)
6 Postciliary and transverse microtubules absent in adoral Postciliary and transverse
membranelles (coded 1) microtubules present in adoral
membranelles (coded 0)
7 Collar polykinetids bipartite (coded 1) Collar polykinetids continuous
(coded 0)
Continued

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 65
Table 3.2 Continued
Character states
Apomorphy Plesiomorphy
8b Adoral zone bipartite in buccal membranelles with small polykinetids Polykinetids and cilia of adoral
and short cilia and collar membranelles with broad polykinetids membranelles gradually decrease
and long cilia (coded 1; coded 1000), buccal membranelles in size towards the cytostome
absent (coded 2; coded 1100), last collar membranelles proximally (coded 0; coded 0000)
elongated (coded 3; coded 1010), last collar membranelles
proximally and distally elongated (coded 4; coded 1011)
9 Undulating membrane(s) often diplostichomonad (two parallel rows Undulating membrane(s)
of basal bodies) or polystichomonad (more than two parallel rows monostichomonad (single row of
of basal bodies; coded 1) basal bodies; coded 0)
10 Paroral membrane absent (coded 1), paroral and endoral Usually endoral and paroral
membranes absent (coded 2) membranes present (coded 0)
11 Cyrtos-like (conspicuously strong) pharyngeal fi bres (coded 1) Common pharyngeal fi bres (coded 0)
12 Cirri absent (coded 1) Cirri present (coded 0)
13a Somatic kinetids unciliated (coded 1) or with clavate cilia (coded 2) Somatic kinetids with rod- shaped or
fusiform cilia (coded 0)
14a Usually one or two somatic kineties (coded 1), usually ten or more Usually 3– 9 somatic kineties
somatic kineties (coded 2) (coded 0)
15 ≥40% of unspecialized somatic kineties shortened or entirely Unspecialized somatic kineties
reduced (coded 1) extend from adoral zone of
membranelles to posterior cell end
(coded 0)
16a Some unspecialized somatic kineties distinctly curved (coded 1) or Unspecialized somatic kineties
forming a posterior spiral (coded 2) longitudinal (coded 0)
17a Oligotrichid ventral kinety erected (coded 1), usually indistinct or Oligotrichid ventral kinety dextrally
absent (coded 2) spiraled (coded 0)
18b Oligotrichid girdle kinety: dextrally spiraled with posterior end Oligotrichid girdle kinety dextrally
inversely orientated (coded 1; coded 100000000); horizontally spiraled (coded 0; coded
orientated with oral primordium posteriorly (coded 2; coded 000000000)
010000000); sinistrally spiraled (coded 3; coded 011000000);
horizontally orientated with dorsal gap (coded 4; coded
010100000); horizontally orientated with oral primordium anteriorly
(coded 5; coded 010010000);Ω-shaped with oral primordium
posteriorly (coded 6; coded 010001000);Ω-shaped with oral
primordium anteriorly (coded 7; coded 000000100); in two inverted
U-shaped fragments (coded 8; coded 000000110); in several
mostly clockwise inclined fragments (coded 9; coded 000000101)
19 Somatic kineties arranged in a right and left ciliary fi eld (coded 1) Somatic kineties more or less
equidistantly arranged (coded 0)
20a Two ventral organelles (coded 1) or one specialized tintinnid ventral Specialized ventral organelles or
kinety (coded 2) tintinnid ventral kinety absent
(coded 0)
21 Tintinnid ventral kinety composed of a monokinetidal anterior and a Tintinnid ventral kinety monokinetidal
dikinetidal posterior portion (coded 1) (coded 0)
22 Right ciliary fi eld and tintinnid ventral kinety separated by a broad Right ciliary fi eld abuts on tintinnid
unciliated stripe (coded 1) ventral kinety (coded 0)
Continued

66 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 3.2 Continued
Character states
Apomorphy Plesiomorphy
23 Two specialized dorsal kineties (coded 1) or one dorsal kinety Specialized dorsal kinety/kineties
(coded 2) absent (coded 0)
24 Specialized posterior kinety present (coded 1) Specialized posterior kinety absent
(coded 0)
25 Lateral ciliary fi eld present (coded 1) Lateral ciliary fi eld absent (coded 0)
26b Unspecialized somatic kineties: some dikinetids with cilia only at the Unspecialized somatic kineties
anterior basal bodies, other dikinetids with two cilia (coded 1; composed of dikinetids, each has
coded 10000000); all dikinetids with two cilia (coded 2; coded a distinct cilium associated only
11000000); most dikinetids with cilia only at the posterior basal with the anterior basal body
bodies, few dikinetids with two cilia (coded 3; coded 11100000); (coded 0; coded 00000000)
all dikinetids with cilia only at the posterior basal bodies (coded 4;
coded 11110000); some dikinetids with cilia only at the posterior
basal bodies, some ciliated monokinetids (coded 5; coded
11111000); ciliated monokinetids (coded 6; coded 11111100);
mostly ciliated monokinetids, some dikinetids with two cilia, some
dikinetids with cilia only at the posterior basal bodies (coded 7;
coded 11100010); mostly ciliated monokinetids, some dikinetids
with two cilia (coded 8; coded 11100011)
27 Somatic kinetids condensed (coded 1) Somatic kinetids distinctly separate
(coded 0)
28a Majority of members with one ellipsoidal macronucleus nodule Majority of members with two
(coded 1), one C -shaped macronucleus (coded 2), or more than macronucleus nodules (coded 0)
two macronucleus nodules (coded 3)
29a Tintinnid extrusomes (capsules) and/or structures usually associated Tintinnid and oligotrichid extrusomes
with tintinnid extrusomes (coded 1) or oligotrichid extrusomes absent (coded 0)
(trichites; coded 2) present
30 Stripe of extrusome attachment sites distinctly apart from the Stripe of extrusome attachment sites
oligotrichid girdle kinety (coded 1) directly anterior to the oligotrichid
girdle kinety (coded 0)
31a Capsule type I (coded 1) or type II (coded 2) present Capsules absent (coded 0)
32 Tintinnid mucocyst type A present (coded 1) Mucocysts absent or different
(coded 0)
33a Contractility of peduncle (coded 1) or tail (coded 2) Posterior cell portion acontractile
(coded 0)
34a Anterior cell portion with contractile tentacles (coded 1) or Anterior cell portion without
tentaculoids (coded 2) cytoplasmic appendages (coded 0)
35 Polysaccharidic cortical platelets present (coded 1) Cortical platelets absent (coded 0)
36 Kinetal lips covering the bases of the somatic cilia present (coded 1) Kinetal lips covering the bases of the
somatic cilia absent (coded 0)
37 Vesicular reticulum present (coded 1) Vesicular reticulum absent (coded 0)
38a Lorica: soft, agglomerated (coded 1); soft, agglomerated, and with Majority of taxa without lorica
subterminal membrane (coded 2); hard, agglomerated (coded 3); (coded 0)
posterior portion agglomerated, anterior hyaline (coded 4); entirely
hyaline (coded 5)
39 Lorica sac and foldable closing apparatus present (coded 1) Lorica sac and foldable closing
apparatus absent (coded 0)
Continued

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 67
Table 3.2 Continued
Character states
Apomorphy Plesiomorphy
40 Enantiotropy (coded 1) Homeotropy (coded 0)
41b Stomatogenesis hypoapokinetal in transient tube (coded 1; coded Stomatogenesis epiapokinetal
100), permanent tube (coded 2; coded 110), or transient pouch (coded 0; coded 000)
(coded 3; coded 101)
42 Undulating membranes originatede novo (coded 1) Undulating membranes originate
from oral primordium or cirral
anlagen (coded 0)
43 Unspecialized somatic kineties originatede novo (coded 1) Unspecialized somatic kineties
originate usually by intrakinetal
proliferation of basal bodies
(coded 0)
44 Reorganization of somatic kineties present (coded 1) Reorganization of somatic kineties
absent (coded 0)
45 Preformed emergence pore of resting cyst closed with a plug Preformed emergence pore and plug
(coded 1) absent in resting cyst (coded 0)
46 Ectocyst (outer cyst layer) bipartite and granular (coded 1) Ectocyst comprises a single
microfi brillar or membranous layer
(coded 0)
47 Wall of resting cyst with inorganic layers (coded 1) Wall of resting cyst without inorganic
layers (coded 0)
48a Lepidosomes: with tubular fi ne structure (coded 1); with fi brous fi ne Lepidosomes absent (coded 0)
structure and conical/spine- like shape (coded 2); with fi brous fi ne
structure and globular shape (coded 3)
49 “Curious structures” in cytoplasm of resting cyst (coded 1) Cytoplasm of resting cyst without
“curious structures” (coded 0)
50 Cyst wall precursors of halteriid type (coded 1) Cyst wall precursors of stichotrich
type (coded 0)
51 Inner cyst membrane that encloses the ciliate emerging from the Inner cyst membrane that encloses
cyst absent (coded 1) the ciliate emerging from the cyst
present (coded 0)
52 Pycnosis of vegetative macronucleus without fragmentation Fragmentation of vegetative
(coded 1) macronucleus before pycnosis
(coded 0)
53a Interlocking arrangement (coded 1) or oblique arrangement (coded Parallel arrangement of conjugants
2) of conjugants (coded 0)
54 Transient dimorphism of conjugants (coded 1) Isomorphic conjugants (coded 0)
55 Conjugants share membranelles (coded 1) Conjugants do not share
membranelles (coded 0)
56 Single derivative of fi rst maturation division performs second division All derivatives of fi rst maturation
(coded 1) division participate in second
division (coded 0)
a Non-additive (unordered) character states, i.e. each state can change into any other state by one step.
b Binary coding of character state trees (fi rst code for Hennigian argumentation scheme; second code for computer
analyses).

68 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 3.3 Distribution of character states over the taxa cladistically analyzed with the computer program Hennig86. Note
that the character state trees of character 8 (bipartition of the adoral zone of membranelles), character 18 (oligotrichid girdle
kinety), character 26 (structure of the somatic kinetids), and character 41 (stomatogenesis) were converted into additive
binary coding (Table 3.2 ) .
10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Stic 0000000000 010000000- ---------- ------0000 0000000 --- 000000 -000 0001000100 002110
Mese 1110100100 000010000- ---------- ------0000 0000010 --- 000000 -100 0111010311 0?1111
Halt 1110100100 000010010- ---------- ------0000 0000110 --- 000000 -100 011101021? ?01111
Phal 1110100100 000010010- ---------- ------0000 0000110 --- 000000 -100 01110?021? ??1111
Cyrt 1110200110 0-21101111 010100000- ------0000 00000120 -- 001000 -110 01001?12?? ??000?
Plst 1110200100 0010111112 010000000- ------0000 00000120 -- 001000- 111 01001112?? ??000?
Limn 1110200100 0010121111 010010000- ------0000 00000120 -- 001000 -111 01001?12?? ??000?
Labo 1110200100 0010101112 011000000- ------0000 00000320 -- 001000 -110 01001?12?? ??000?
Noap 1110200100 0010101111 000000000- ------0000 00000021 -- 001000 -110 01001?12?? ??000?
Nosi 1110200100 0010101111 000000000- ------0000 00000020 -- 001000 -110 01001?12?? ??000?
Omeg 1110200100 0010101111 000000100- ------0000 00000120 -- 001000 -110 01001?12?? ??000?
Opis 1110200100 0010101111 010010000- ------0000 00000120 -- 001000- 110 01001?12?? ??000?
Fois 1110200100 0010101111 010010000- ------0000 00000021 -- 001000 -110 01001?12?? ??000?
Plle 1110200100 0010101110 000000000- ------0000 00000120 -- 001000 -110 01001?12?? ??000?
Spir 1110200100 0010101111 100000000- ------0000 00000120 -- 001000- 110 01001?12?? ??000?
Stro 1110200100 0010101111 010000000- ------0000 00000120 -- 001000 -110 01001?12?? 1?000?
Pato 1110200100 0010101111 010001000- ------0000 00000320 -- 201000 -110 01001?12?? ??000?
Psto 1110200100 0010101111 010000000- ------0000 00000320 -- 211000 -110 01001?12?? ??000?
Spto 1110200100 0010101112 011000000- ------0000 00000320 -- 201000 -110 01001?12?? ??000?
Tont 1110200100 0010101112 000000000- ------0000 00000320 -- 201000 -110 01001?12?? ??000?
Apos 1110200100 0010101112 000000110- ------0000 00000120 -- 001000 -110 01001?12?? ??000?
Vari 1110200100 0010101112 000000101- ------0000 00000120 -- 001000 -110 01001?12?? ??000?
Lelb 1111201101 001010010- ---------- ------1000 0000000 --- 000000 -110 11001?10?? ?1?000
Lova 1111201101 001010111- ---------- ------0000 0000010 --- 000000 -110 11001?10?? ?1?000
Lsol 1111201101 001010010- ---------- ------1100 0000000 --- 000000 -110 11001?10?? ?1?000
Lohm 1111200101 001010010- ---------- ------1111 0000010 --- 000000 -110 11001?10?? ?1?000
Lynn 1112200101 001010100- ---------- ------1111 1000000 --- 000000 -110 11001?10?? ?1?000
Pstb 1111200101 001010011- ---------- ------1111 1100120 --- 000100 -110 11001?10?? ?11000
Rimo 1111200101 001010010- ---------- ------1111 1100120 --- 000100 -110 11001?10?? ?11000
Strb 1111200101 001010012- ---------- ------1111 1100120 --- 000100 -110 11001?10?? ?11000
Parp 1112200101 001010200- ---------0 0--0001100 0000000 --- 000000 -110 11001?10?? ?1?000
Parb 1112200101 101010200- ---------0 0--0001100 0000030- -- 000000 -110 11001?10?? ?1?000
Spsi 1111200101 001010200- ---------0 0--0001100 0000000 --- 000000 -110 11001?10?? ?1?000
semi 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 1--0001110 0010011- ?? 1?00110110 1100??10?? ?10000
fl uv 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 1--0001110 0000011- ?? 1?00110110 1100??10?? ?10000
pusi 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 1--0001110 0000011- ?? 1?00110110 1100??10?? ?10000
cyli 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 1--0001111 1100011- ?? 1?00110110 1100??10?? ?10000
Memb 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 1--0001111 000000?- ?? 1?00120110 1100??10?? ?10000
Nola 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 2000001110 0011001 -?? 1200150110 1100??10?? ?10000
Euti 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 2001001110 0011031 -?? 1200150110 1100??10?? ?10000
Fehr 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 2001011110 0011000- -? 1200150110 1100??10?? ?10000
Sarc 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 2112011110 0011001 -?? 1200150110 11001?10?? ?10000
bras 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 2002011110 001100? -?? 1200130110 1100??10?? ?10000
Codo 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 2002111110 0011001 -21 1200131110 1100??10?? ?10000
Continued

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 69
Table 3.3 Continued
10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Cpsi 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 2002111110 0011031 -21 1200141110 1100??10?? ?10000
Cyma 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 2002111110 0011001 -?? 1200150110 1100??10?? ?10000
Otsp 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 2002111110 0011001 -1? 1200130110 11000?10?? ?10000
lacu 1111210101 001010210- ---------1 2002111110 001100? -?? 1?00130110 1100??10?? ?10000
paci 1111210101 001010210 - ---------1 2002111110 0011001 -21 1200140110 1100??10?? ?10000
Apos, Apostrombidium; bras, Tintinnopsis brasiliensis; Codo, Codonella; Cpsi, Codonellopsis; cyli, Tintinnopsis cylin-
drata; Cyma, Cymatocylis; Cyrt, Cyrtostrombidium; Euti, Eutintinnus; Fehr, Favella ehrenbergii; fl uv, subgenus Tintin-
nidium with T . fl uviatile;Fois,Foissneridium;Halt,Halteria;Labo,Laboea;lacu,Stenosemella lacustris;Lelb,Leegaardiella
elbraechteri; Limn, Limnostrombidium; Lohm, Lohmanniella; Lova, Leegaardiella ovalis; Lsol, Leegaardiella sol; Lynn,
Lynnella;Memb,Membranicola;Mese,Meseres;Noap,Novistrombidium apsheronicum;Nola,Nolaclusilis;Nosi,Novi-
strombidium sinicum; Omeg, Omegastrombidium; Opis, Opisthostrombidium; Otsp, other Tintinnopsis species; p aci,
Stenosemella pacifi ca;Parb,Parastrombidium;Parp,Parastrombidinopsis;Pato,Paratontonia;Phal,Pelagohalteria;Plle,
Parallelostrombidium;Plst,Pelagostrombidium;Pstb,Pelagostrobilidium;Psto,Pseudotontonia;pusi, subgenusTintin-
nidium with T. pusillum;Rimo,Rimostrombidium;Sarc, Schmidingerella arcuata;semi, subgenusSemitintinnidium with
Tintinnidium semiciliatum;Spir,Spirostrombidium;Spsi,Strombidinopsis;Spto,Spirotontonia; Stic, stichotrichs;Strb,
Strobilidium;Stro,Strombidium;Tont,Tontonia;Vari,Varistrombidium.
nodule. The cladogram (Fig. 3.2 ) is only shown for the of a vesicular reticulum (character 37 -1 ), the lack of
choreotrichids, but by means of Table 3.3 , we can see postciliary and transverse microtubules at the adoral
that the tontoniid oligotrichids also possess more than membranelles (associates of basal bodies extending
two macronucleus nodules. Admittedly, Table 3.3 is posteriorly and leftwards, respectively; character 6 - 1),
more diffi cult to read than Table 3.2 , owing to the and a disintegration of the macronucleus nodules
binary coding of character state trees, which is pro- without a preceding fragmentation during conjuga-
vided by the second code in Table 3.2 . Character 28 is tion (character 52 - 1; with fragmentation in sticho-
marked as non- additive in Table 3.2, i .e. the character trichs and halteriids; Agatha & Foissner 2009 and
states are unordered and each state can turn into each references therein). The last feature probably requires
other by one step. some explanation.
For parsimony reasons, the introduction of an During conjugation, partners of probably different
entirely hyaline lorica was assumed in the ancestor of mating types fuse in their anterior cell portions. The
tintinnids with a monokinetidal ventral kinety (char- somatic macronucleus disintegrates with or without a
acter 38 - 5). The anterior cell portion of Codonellopsis preceding fragmentation, while the generative diploid
bears tentaculoids (character 34 - 2); similar, but prob- micronucleus performs a meiosis comprising a fi rst
ably analogous structures are found in an tontoniid and second maturation division; usually, three of the
oligotrichid (character 34 - 1; Skovgaard & Legrand haploid derivatives disintegrate. The surviving fourth
2005 ). The unspecialized somatic kineties (dorsal, pos- derivative divides mitotically, generating a stationary
terior, and ventral kineties are excluded) of C odonel- and a migratory pronucleus (Fig. 4.6 ). As indicated by
lopsis are composed of monokinetids and few dikinetids the names of the pronuclei, the stationary remains
with two cilia (character 26 - 8). The complex changes in each partner, while the migratory pronuclei are
in the structure of the somatic kineties are translated exchanged between the partners. Finally, each conju-
into binary codes, forming eight columns in Table 3.3 . gant has its own haploid stationary pronucleus and the
And we see in the cladogram that the evolution of the haploid migratory pronucleus of its partner. Subse-
kinety structure passed two previous character states quently, the pronuclei fuse, forming the diploid syn-
(26 - 3 and 26 - 2). The parsimony principle again neces- karyon. Taxon - specifi c divisions of the synkaryon
sitated the introduction of a soft, agglomerated lorica produce the micronuclei, the macronucleus nodules,
at the beginning of the tintinnid evolution (character and disintegrating derivatives.
38 - 1). Although not studied in the genus C odonellopsis , The affi liation of the genus Codonellopsis with the tin-
some of its character states can simply be predicted tinnid family Dictyocystidae in the revised classifi cation
owing to its affi liation with the tintinnids: the presence (Table 3.4 ) refl ects its evolutionary history and natural

70 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
relationships at least partly (Section 3.6 ). This assign- and deleting highly variable regions. However, we
ment is based on the presence of the lorica sac with its should keep in mind that the morphologic characters
foldable closing apparatus, a feature that is shared by are often the product of more than one gene and that
the genera C odonaria , C odonella , and D ictyocysta . gene trees and species trees are not the same (Nichols
2001 ).
Next, the phylogenetic relationships can be inferred
3.5 MOLECULAR ANALYSIS AND by various analytical methods, including algorithms
COMPARISON WITH MORPHOLOGIC DATA based on the parsimony principle (Maximum Parsi-
mony, MP). Because each method has its advantages
Here, we present a short introduction into gene and disadvantages, usually more than one computer
sequencing, followed by the results of the SSU rRNA program is run to analyze the data [for an introduction
analyses and a comparison with the hypothesis of tin- to the methods, see Holder & Lewis (2003) ; details are
tinnid evolution inferred from morphologic data. provided by Felsenstein (2004) ]. Some of them, fi rst
calculate the relative probability of transitions (A < >
G, C < > T) versus transversions (A < > C, G < > T) or
Gene sequence analysis in general the degree to which the rate of evolution differs
across the nucleotide sites based on the given data set,
The SSU rRNA is the gene usually analyzed to infer and then implement the obtained substitution model
phylogenetic relationships in ciliates, as its mutation (e.g., the Kimura - 2 - parameter or General - Time -
rate is not too low (conserved) or high (multiple nucle- Reversible models) into the computer program (e.g.,
otide substitutions at the same site obscure the true Maximum Likelihood). Others merely calculate the
evolution). In some studies, the internal transcribed evolutionary distances between sequences, namely, the
spacer (ITS 1 and 2) sequences are analyzed to infer number of different nucleotides (Neighbor - Joining).
the evolution at and below species level and the phylo- Finally, the confi dence of the obtained trees is calcu-
geography, as they have elevated mutation rates. In lated by, for example, bootstrapping procedures.
recent years, mitochondrial DNA, in particular the
cytochrome - c oxidase subunit 1 (c ox1 ) gene, has been
suggested as a possible molecular marker for species Data acquisition
distinction (Hebert et al. 2003a, b ) owing to its higher
resolution at species level. Initial studies in ciliates In August 2011, there were 66 SSU rRNA gene se-
showed the great potential of this gene to distinctly quences of tintinnid ciliates available from public data-
separate closely related species (see Barth et al. 2006 ; bases (GenBank, EMBL). These 66 sequences can be
Lynn & Str ü der - Kypke 2006 ; Str ü der - Kypke & Lynn assigned to 37 genetically distinct entities (operational
2010 ). The c ox1 gene is, however, still comparatively taxonomic units). However, 11 of these taxa remain
rarely studied in ciliates, and data for tintinnids are not unidentifi ed, because they result from environmental
available. sequencing or because the genus and/or species were
Although gene sequence analysis was expensive not determined during sampling. A major shortcoming
and time - consuming a few years ago, now extraction, in many molecular studies is uncertain species identifi -
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplifi cation, and cation, which is generally based on lorica morphology
sequencing are routine. The nucleotide sequences are only. Therefore, in many cases, the identity of se-
subsequently aligned with homologous sequences quenced tintinnid taxa is unknown or remains doubt-
obtained from a databank (e.g., GenBank), and the ful. Compared with the number of lorica - based species,
alignment is further refi ned based on the secondary the percentage of species with molecular data is ex-
structure of the SSU rRNA molecule. The result is a tremely small, and only 14 of the assumed 75 genera
data matrix similar to that shown in Table 3 .3; instead (Table 3.4 ) are represented by SSU rRNA gene se-
of numbers, presumably homologous nucleotides are quences (about 19%). Thirteen of the SSU rRNA se-
listed. The amount of characters provided by SSU quences in the phylogenetic tree (Fig. 3.13 ) are assigned
rRNA gene sequencing is much higher than that of to the genus T intinnopsis , which we regard as a taxon
cladistic analyses, as about 1600 or even more nucle- incertae sedis (with uncertain placement; Section 3.6 )
otides remain after trimming the ends of the sequences within the order Tintinnida until more morphologic

Fig. 3.13 Maximum likelihood tree inferred from SSU rRNA gene data of representative tintinnid species, computed with
PhyML (Guindon et al. 2010 ) and based on the general time - reversible (GTR) model with gamma distribution and an estimate
of invariable sites ( adapted from Agatha, S. & Str ü der - Kypke, M.C. ( 2012 ) Reconciling cladistic and genetic analyses in
choreotrichid ciliates (Protists, Spirotrichea, Oligotrichea). Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, in press). The numbers at the
nodes represent the support values for the maximum likelihood, Bayesian inference, maximum parsimony, and neighbor
joining analyses, respectively. Asterisks mark full support in all analyses, whereas dashes indicate support values of less than
20% (or 0.2 posterior probability). The scale bar represents 10 substitutions per 100 nucleotides.

72 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
and molecular data become available. Therefore, any tinguishing features, whereas the description includes
results of molecular phylogenetic analyses can only be all data. Likewise, molecular biologists search for
regarded as preliminary, although some patterns begin nucleotide differences that characterize certain taxa.
to emerge, as more sequences are included. Actually, a detailed analysis of the gene sequences
revealed some signature nucleotides at species, genus,
or family level (Figs 3.14 and 3.15 ). The deep diver-
SSU rRNA phylogenies gence in the family Tintinnidae is based on several
nucleotide differences, shown in Fig. 3.14 a. On the
All published phylogenetic trees show the following other hand, there are also several unique nucleotide
topology (Fig. 3 .13 ). positions that unite the genera Eutintinnus , Amphorel-
1. The basal branch within the tintinnids represents lopsis , Steenstrupiella , and Salpingella and separate them
the family Tintinnidiidae (T intinnidium ; soft, agglomer- from the genera Favella , Codonella , Tintinnopsis , and
ated loricae; right and left ciliary fi elds, ventral Rhabdonella . Some positions are shared among the
organelles). family Tintinnidae and F avella panamensis (family Pty-
2. The family Tintinnidae (E utintinnus , Salpingella , chocylididae), which is refl ected in the topology of the
Amphorellopsis , Steenstrupiella , all with hyaline, mono- phylogenetic tree that strongly separates these basal
laminar and compact lorica walls) is paraphyletic with taxa from the remaining species. The genera Rhab-
a branch representing the genus Eutintinnus (right donella , Metacylis , and S chmidingerella (with some
and left ciliary fi elds and ventral and dorsal kine- former Favella species) cluster as one branch in the phy-
ties)and another for the remaining genera. Sequences logenetic tree. The two sequences of M etacylis group
from additional genera of this family are required to with Rhabdonella and S chmidingerella , respectively.
confi rm whether the deep divergence is real or owing Several signature nucleotides support this division of
to undersampling (species fi lling the gap have not the genus Metacylis (Fig. 3.14 b). However, three signa-
been sequenced). ture nucleotides are unique to the two Rhabdonella
3. The family Ptychocylididae branches next, highly species and are absent in Metacylis . The analysis of
supported, but only represented by the genus Favella additional sequences is required to determine the level
(hyaline, monolaminar lorica walls with alveoli; right, of sequence variation among these genera and to
left, and lateral ciliary fi elds, ventral and dorsal kine- resolve their taxonomic assignment.
ties). All remaining taxa display a less statistically The genus F avella (family Ptychocylididae) is sepa-
supported topology, which varies depending on the rated by a long branch from the remaining tintinnid
sequences analyzed and the algorithm used. However, clusters, indicating many nucleotide changes and a
two clusters are consistently supported: the family high mutation rate. Accordingly, many signature posi-
Dictyocystidae (lorica sac and capsule type II) and the tions exist, which separate this genus from the other
family Rhabdonellidae (R habdonella and Schmidingerella tintinnid taxa (Fig. 3.14 b).
with some former Favella species; hyaline, monolami- The genus T intinnopsis is paraphyletic; probably, it
nar lorica walls with alveoli, surface ridges, and pores). consists of several genera characterized by different
4. The genus S tenosemella is placed within the family somatic ciliary patterns (Fig. 3.2 ) and lorica wall tex-
Dictyocystidae. The lack of a lorica sac contradicts this tures (Chapter 2 ). Thus, it is not surprising that the
affi liation, but Stenosemella shares the capsule type II genus as a whole displays no signature nucleotides.
and its lorica is composed of a hyaline collar and an Nevertheless, some clusters in the phylogenetic tree
agglomerated bowl like those in C odonellopsis and most reveal unique signatures, for example the branch com-
Dictyocysta species. prisingTintinnopsis cylindrica , T. tubulosoides , T. tocan-
5. The genus M etacylis is placed within the family tinensis , and T . uruguayensis (Fig. 3.15 ).
Rhabdonellidae. The apparently monolaminar lorica Several signatures distinguish the family Dictyo-
wall with alveoli, surface ridges, and pores supports cystidae plus Stenosemella nivalis and S. ventricosa from
this assignment at least for M. angulata . Nevertheless, the remaining tintinnid taxa. Within this grouping the
additional molecular and morphological evidence is two branches consisting of (1) Codonellopsis and Steno-
required to confi rm the close phylogenetic relation- semella nivalis and (2) Dictyocysta and Codonella reveal
ships of Stenosemella and Metacylis , respectively. some distinct signatures. The relationship of the S teno-
In taxonomy, a species name is a hypothesis, and a semella species to the Dictyocystidae still needs to be
species diagnosis represents a compilation of the dis- resolved (see above).

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 73
Fig. 3.14 Signature nucleotide positions of supported clusters in the order Tintinnida. (a) Family Tintinnidae. (b) Families
Ptychocylididae and Rhabdonellidae. The numbers above the nucleotides refer to the positions in the original alignment. A
background in different gray tints defi nes the distinguishing nucleotides; in cases where several signature nucleotides are
present at the same position, darker and lighter tints are used to differentiate between them. The shading does not relate to
any evolutionary state. The horizontal lines separate the supported clusters of the phylogenetic tree. Dots present missing
data. Species abbreviations: Amphore, A mphorellopsis acuta ; Codapic, Codonella apicata ; Eut_ENB, E utintinnus sp. (ENB99);
Eutfrak, E utintinnus fraknoi ; Eutpec2, Eutintinnus pectinis (Epec99ssu_1); Eutpect, E utintinnus pectinis ; Fav_FNB, Favella sp.
(FNB99); Fav_LAK, F avella sp. (Fehr99ssu_1); Favcamp, Favella campanula ; Favehre, Favella ehrenbergii (Korea); Favpan2, Favella
panamensis (FeMD10 - 46); Favpana, F avella panamensis ; Met_MNB, M etacylis sp. (MNB99); Metangu, M etacylis angulata ;
Rhabran, Rhabdonella brandti ; Rhahebe, R habdonella hebe ; Salping, S alpingella acuminata ; Scharcu, S chmidingerella arcuata ;
Schtara, S chmidingerella taraikaensis ; Steenst, S teenstrupiella steenstrupii; Tpscyli, T intinnopsis cylindrica .
Comparison of SSU rRNA phylogenies and 2011 ; for halteriids, see Agatha & Foissner 2009 ). In
cladograms with former hypothesis tintinnids, the two approaches both show the following
features.
A comparison of the gene trees with cladograms is 1. The early branching of the genus T intinnidium
currently impeded by differences in the species ana- followed by E utintinnus , Favella , and a diverse group
lyzed. Actually, only eight genera were analyzed cla- of highly developed tintinnids (compare Figs 3.2 and
distically and genetically (Figs 3.2 and 3.13 ), and Kim 3.12 with Fig. 3.13 ).
S.Y. et al. (2010) published the fi rst study, in which 2. A grouping of the genera with a lorica sac and fold-
both molecular and detailed morphological data were able closing apparatus.
described for the same tintinnid species, namely F avella 3. A paraphyly of the genus T intinnopsis .
ehrenbergii , the type species of the genus Favella . There- The two Favella clusters found in previous gene
fore, the following comparison cannot be very detailed. trees, could be confi rmed by morphologic features
It should be noted that for tintinnids the gene tree (Sections 3.3 and 3.6) , justifying the establishment
and cladogram match rather well. This is in marked of the genus Schmidingerella for Favella species clus-
contrast to some other ciliate groups, in which the tering with Rhabdonella . Although the phylogenetic
phylogenies obtained by both methods deviate dis- relationship of the genus Stenosemella with taxa pos-
tinctly, necessitating a reconsideration of homology sessing a lorica sac requires some further investiga-
and the investigation of further morphologic and/or tions, the presence of this structure warranted a
molecular data (for colpodid ciliates, see Foissner et al. far - reaching revision of the tintinnid families

74 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 3.15 Signature nucleotide positions of supported clusters in the order Tintinnida. Families Dictyocystidae and
Rhabdonellidae, and various T intinnopsis species. The numbers above the nucleotides refer to the positions in the original
alignment. A background in different gray tints defi nes the distinguishing nucleotides; in cases where several signature
nucleotides are present at the same position, darker and lighter tints are used to differentiate between them. The shading does
not relate to any evolutionary state. The horizontal lines separate the supported clusters of the phylogenetic tree. Dots present
missing data. Species abbreviations: Cpsamer, C odonellopsis americana ; Cpsnipp, C odonellopsis nipponica ; Codapic, C odonella
apicata ; Dicreti, Dictyocysta reticulata ; Metangu, Metacylis angulata ; Rhahebe, Rhabdonella hebe ; Scharcu, Schmidingerella arcuata ;
Steniva, S tenosemella nivalis ; Stevent, Stenosemella ventricosa ; Tpscyli, T intinnopsis cylindrica ; Tpsdada, T intinnopsis dadayi ;
Tpslohm,Tintinnopsis lohmanni ; Tpsradi, T intinnopsis radix ; Tpssuba, T intinnopsis subacuta ; Tpstoca, Tintinnopsis tocantinensis ;
Tpstubu,Tintinnopsis tubulosoides ; Tpsurug, T intinnopsis uruguayensis .
Codonellidae, Codonellopsidae, and Dictyocystidae. interrelated, and an evolutionary trend from agglom-
The differences in the somatic ciliary pattern within erated to hyaline loricae – as postulated by Kofoid &
the genus T intinnopsis as well as its paraphyly in the Campbell (1939) – is not evident (Str ü der - Kypke &
gene trees necessitate a reasonable split, which cannot Lynn 2003 ). Only the family Tintinnidiidae was pre-
be performed until the cell morphology and SSU rRNA dicted by Kofoid & Campbell (1939) to be primitive, and
gene sequence of its type species, T . beroidea , are the genus T intinnidium actually branches at the base of
known and confi rmed. the tintinnids in the cladograms and gene trees. Both
The phylogenetic relationships inferred from the SSU analyses refl ect the increase in complexity of the
rRNA gene and morphology (Figs 3.2 and 3.13 ; somatic ciliary patterns in tintinnids with a ventral
Snoeyenbos - West et al. 2002 ; Str ü der - Kypke & Lynn kinety. The most highly developed pattern occurs in a
2003 ; Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke 2007 ; Str ü der - Kypke & diverse group of tintinnids and is associated with dif-
Lynn 2008 ; Gao et al. 2009 ; Li Z. et al. 2009 ; Agatha ferent lorica types: hard, agglomerated loricae, hyaline
& Str ü der - Kypke 2012 ) markedly contradict the loricae, and loricae composed of a hyaline collar and
hypothesis of tintinnid evolution and the lorica - based an agglomerated bowl. The same type of lorica can also
classifi cation by Kofoid & Campbell (1939) . The most be associated with different patterns of the somatic cili-
obvious disparity is the fact that in the phylogenetic ature, as shown for the hyaline loricae by N olaclusilis ,
trees, species with hyaline and agglomerated loricae Eutintinnus , F avella , S chmidingerella , and Cymatocylis .
are not separate taxonomic entities. On the contrary, Likewise, hard, agglomerated loricae occur in genera
species with hyaline and agglomerated loricae are with a right, left, and lateral ciliary fi eld as well as a

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 75
ventral and dorsal kinety, which differ in the presence relationships of the taxa. In most tintinnids, only a
of a posterior kinety (absent in Tintinnopsis brasiliensis , small part of the organism, the lorica, has been used
while present in most Tintinnopsis species, Codonella , in species descriptions, whereas cytological data are
and Stenosemella lacustris ). Accordingly, the different not available. The lorica, however, shows a high
lorica types are not necessarily correlated with differ- intraspecifi c variability due to environmental condi-
ent somatic ciliary patterns, as suggested by Kofoid & tions and the cell cycle (Chapter 2 ). On the other hand,
Campbell (1939) . genetic analyses of the internal transcribed spacer
Laval - Peuto & Brownlee (1986) expected that the regions indicated high levels of genetic heterogeneity
most primitive tintinnids would have many somatic in similar tintinnid morphotypes (morphologically
kineties per cell circumference (high kinetal density defi ned units; Snoeyenbos- W est et al. 2002 ). There-
index), long ciliary rows, and no specialized kineties fore, it is not surprising that cladistic and molecular
and ciliary fi elds. Although the last features are also analyses also demonstrated the inadequacy of the
regarded as plesiomorphic in the present analysis (Sec- lorica types for inferring phylogenetic relationships
tions 3.3 and 3.4 ), the consideration of the number of (Sections 3.3 and 3.5 ).
kineties resulted in a rather different idea of tintinnid Although tintinnids have been studied for more
evolution. The position of T intinnidium near the base of than 230 years, we are still unable to circumscribe
the tintinnids was also proposed by the model of Laval - most species properly and thus to provide even a
Peuto & Brownlee (1986) , but the sequence of the rough estimate of how many tintinnid species exist.
remaining taxa was in general agreement with the Therefore, a reliable list of valid species cannot be pre-
hypothesis of Kofoid & Campbell ( 1939) and thus con- sented here. The scarcity of cytological data about
tradicts the recent fi ndings. these exciting plankton ciliates also prevents a far -
The quintessence of the genetic and cladistic analy- reaching revision beyond those by Loeblich Jr &
ses is that the lorica types (hyaline; soft, agglomerated; Tappan (1968) , Corliss (1979) , Small & Lynn (1985) ,
hard, agglomerated; composed of a hyaline collar and Laval - Peuto (1994) , Aescht (2001) , and Lynn & Small
an agglomerated bowl) can hardly be used to infer phy- (2002) , as argued by Lynn (2008) . Nevertheless,
logenetic relationships because they indicate natural recent cladistic (Section 3.3 ) and molecular (Section
groupings only at the genus level, while rarely at 3.5 ) analyses allow partial improvements of the
higher ranks (e.g., Tintinnidiidae). The comparison of lorica - based classifi cation (Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke
both analyses indicates that the development of the 2012 ). Because the relationships among the tintin-
somatic ciliary patterns appropriately refl ects evolu- nids are far from been fully understood, the families
tion in tintinnids. For a higher resolution among the and the genera within the families are merely alpha-
genera with the most complex ciliary pattern, data on betically listed (Table 3.4 ). The improvements of the
the subtle differences and further features are required. tintinnid classifi cation described below concern (1)
Admittedly, the investigation of taxonomic features the revision of the families Codonellidae, Codonellop-
and their cladistic analysis are more time - consuming sidae, and Dictyocystidae, (2) the affi liation of the
in ciliates than genetic studies. Nevertheless, the cla- recently established genus Schmidingerella with the
distic results are more informative, as they represent family Rhabdonellidae, and (3) a preliminary revision
a testable hypothesis about character evolution and of the genera. These kinds of taxonomic action are
adaptive processes. On the other hand, molecular anal- ruled by the International Code of Zoological Nomen-
yses might indicate homoplasious characters. So, com- clature (ICZN 1999 ).
bined analyses of morphologic and genetic data are
strongly recommended for future species descriptions
(Lynn & Simpson 2009) and investigations of phyloge-
netic relationships. Recent changes in the classifi cation
The interpretation of the lorica sac (Fig. 2.2b – d) as
3.6 SYSTEMATICS synapomorphy of the genera C odonaria , C odonella ,
Codonellopsis , and Dictyocysta was supported by the
Ideal taxonomic classifi cations (systematics) are the close relationship of the genera in SSU rRNA phylog-
translation of the evolutionary history and natural enies (Fig. 3.13 ; Agatha 2010a ). Far - reaching changes

76 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
were thus necessary, especially as three of them are remain for the present as incertae sedis in the
type genera (name -b earing types) of the families tintinnids.
Codonellidae, Codonellopsidae, and Dictyocystidae Previously published SSU rRNA analyses displayed a
(Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke 2012 ). The four genera were paraphyly of the genus F avella , forming two distantly
united in the oldest family, the Dictyocystidae, and the related clusters: one cluster branched just after the
genera Wangiella and L aackmanniella were affi liated Eutintinnus species, the other was closely related to
incertae sedis. In W angiella , the prismatic fl aps of the Metacylis and R habdonella (Str ü der - Kypke & Lynn
inner collar described by Nie (1934) might correspond 2003, 2008 ; Gao et al. 2009 ; Li Z. et al. 2009 ; Kim S.Y.
to a closing apparatus, and the genus thus possibly et al. 2010 ). The paraphyly was also recognizable in
represents a junior synonym of the genus Dictyocysta . the cladogram. Thus, it is now possible to relate genetic
In the genus Laackmanniella , a lorica sac and closing grouping with morphologic features. This justifi ed the
apparatus are unknown; hence, its assignment to the establishment of two distinct genera, namely Favella
Dictyocystidae is uncertain, although indicated by a with F. ehrenbergii as type and the new genus Schmi-
Codonellopsis - like, posteriorly open lorica. The generic dingerella with Favella arcuata as type (Agatha &
affi liation of the comparatively well - known freshwater Str ü der - Kypke 2012 ). The distinguishing morphologic
species Codonella cratera is probably incorrect, as a features concern the monolaminar lorica wall with
closing apparatus and lorica sac were never mentioned alveoli and the somatic ciliary pattern. Favella has a
(Foissner et al. 1999 ; Agatha 2010a ). Because the smooth wall and a monokinetidal ventral kinety abut-
cytological features of the type species Tintinnopsis ting on the right ciliary fi eld (Figs 2.14b , 3.9 a, b,
beroidea are insuffi ciently known (Agatha & Riedel - 3.10 a, and 3.16 a – g). S chmidingerella arcuata has a wall
Lorj é 2006 ), C . cratera is not affi liated with the genus with surface ridges and pores, and its ventral kinety is
Tintinnopsis , but its somatic ciliary pattern is not any separated from the right ciliary fi eld by an unciliated
longer representative of the genus C odonella . However, stripe and composed of a monokinetidal anterior and
Petz et al. (1995) found in Codonellopsis glacialis , dikinetidal posterior portion (Figs 2.14a , 3.9 e, f, 3.10 b,
another member of the Dictyocystidae, the same and 3.17 a – f).
complex somatic ciliary pattern (a ventral, dorsal, and Although F avella ehrenbergii remains affi liated with
posterior kinety plus a lateral, right, and left ciliary the family Ptychocylididae, Schmidingerella arcuata was
fi eld). Accordingly, it is assumed that this pattern is assigned to the family Rhabdonellidae owing to a
characteristic of the entire family. similar lorica wall and the close relationship with
After the transfer of the genus Codonellopsis to the the genus R habdonella in the SSU rRNA gene trees (Fig.
family Dictyocystidae, there was only one extant genus 3.13 ; Gao et al. 2009 ; Li Z. et al. 2009 ; Kim S.Y. et al.
left, namely Stenosemella , whose diagnosis was 2010 ; Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke 2012 ). The relation-
improved by Agatha & Tsai (2008) . This genus is type ship of Metacylis angulata with R habdonella and Schmi-
of the subfamily Stenosemellinae Campbell, 1 954, dingerella in the SSU rRNA genealogies is supported by
which was raised to family rank by Agatha & Str ü der - the monolaminar lorica wall with alveoli, pores, and
Kypke (2012) . The affi liation of the many fossil genera folds (Lackey & Balech 1966) . Further genetic and,
of the family Codonellopsidae mentioned by Lynn especially, morphologic data about the cell and lorica
(2008) is questionable. Agatha & Tsai (2008) syno- are required to decide on a transfer of M etacylis , which
nymized the genus L uminella with Stenosemella , as they is the type of the family Metacylididae, to the family
recognized that the type species S . ventricosa possesses Rhabdonellidae.
small windows in its hyaline collar, the distinguishing
feature of the genus L uminella . Additional changes
Three genera lost their home, the family Codonelli-
dae, after the transfer of the type genus Codonella to Further minor changes concern the families Ascamp-
the family Dictyocystidae: Codonopsis , P oroecus , and belliellidae, Metacylididae, Petalotrichidae, Undellidae,
Tintinnopsis . No alternative family name exists for these and Xystonellidae.
taxa and only the lorica features are known of the Family Ascampbelliellidae. Laval - Peuto (1994) spec-
type species. Because these features are insuffi cient ulated about a synonymy of the genus Luxiella with
for placement in a natural tintinnid classifi cation, Acanthostomella , although both differ mainly in a sub-
no new families are established, and the three genera apical row of small windows (present compared with

Fig. 3.16 Favella panamensis (adapted from Agatha, S. & Str ü der - Kypke, M.C. ( 2012 ) Reconciling cladistic and genetic
analyses in choreotrichid ciliates (Protists, Spirotrichea, Oligotrichea). Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, in press; a, b, d, e,
from life; c, f, g, scanning electron micrographs). (a) Longitudinal optical section. (b) Anterior ventral cell portion. Kinety 2,
fi rst row of the right ciliary fi eld, abuts on the ventral kinety. (c) Lateral view of lorica showing the smooth surface.
(d) Alveolar texture of the lorica wall. (e, f) Posterior lorica processes showing twisted ribs. (g) Lorica of c oxliella form. Note the
smooth surface of the whorls. K2, fi rst kinety of right ciliary fi eld; L, lorica; LA, lateral ciliary fi eld; P, peduncle; VK, ventral
kinety. Scale bars 100 μ m (a), 50 μ m (c, g), 20 μ m (b, e, f), and 10 μ m (d).

78 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 3.17 Schmidingerella arcuata (adapted from Agatha, S. & Str ü der - Kypke, M.C. ( 2012 ) Reconciling cladistic and genetic
analyses in choreotrichid ciliates (Protists, Spirotrichea, Oligotrichea). Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, in press; a, d, from
life; b, c, e, f, scanning electron micrographs). (a, b) Longitudinal optical section and lateral view. Note the rough lorica surface
(b). (c) Anterior ventral cell portion of a middle divider showing an unciliated stripe (arrowhead) separating the right ciliary
fi eld and the ventral kinety. (d) Two kinds of reticulation are recognizable in the lorica wall: one caused by the small alveoli,
the other caused by the reticulate rims on the outer surface. (e) Outer lorica surface showing a reticulation and pores.
(f) Posterior lorica process showing a reticulate surface. L, lorica; LA, lateral ciliary fi eld; OP, oral primordium; P, peduncle; RF,
right ciliary fi eld; VK, ventral kinety. Scale bars 100 μ m (a), 50 μ m (b), 20 μ m (d), 10 μ m (c, f), and 5 μ m (e) .
absent; Lecal 1953 ). Because the cell cycles are distinguished by a posterior lorica opening from the
unknown, we keep the genera separate. Likewise, Ascampbelliella species (Marshall 1934 ), we keep the
Laval - Peuto (1994) speculated about a synonymy of genera separate. Luxiella and Niemarshallia are incertae
the genus Niemarshallia with its single species and the sedis in the family Ascampbelliellidae, following Lynn
genus Ascampbelliella . Because N iemarshallia aperta is (2008) .

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 79
Family Metacylididae. The genus R hizodomus was information, R otundocylis thus cannot properly be
established with R. tagatzi as type species by monotypy assigned to any family; therefore, it is placed incertae
(it included only a single species when established; sedis in the tintinnids.
Strelkow & Wirketis 1950 ; Aescht 2001 ). As it might The genera Amplectellopsis and Cricundella were dis-
have a sparsely agglomerated lorica and thus resem- tinguished by Kofoid & Campbell (1929) from Amplect-
bles some Tintinnopsis species (especially T . corniger ella owing to the absence of a buckling of the lorica
Hada, 1964 ; Chapter 1 0) , its assignment to the family walls and a broadened bowl, respectively. Laval- Peuto
Metacylididae is questionable. Likewise, the genus Styl- (1994) apparently regarded these distinguishing fea-
icauda with its single species S. platensis resembles Tin- tures as insuffi cient and synonymized the genera with
tinnopsis species, except for the posterior process Amplectella . Because the cells might provide features
lacking agglomerated particles (Cunha & Fonseca that support the separation, the synonymizations seem
1917 ). Because a future split of the paraphyletic genus premature, and the genera are kept separate as in the
Tintinnopsis is very likely and distinct branches might classifi cation by Lynn (2008) .
fi nally be assigned to the two genera, we refrain from a The genus Proplectella was established by Kofoid
synonymization and affi liate Rhizodomus and S tyli- & Campbell (1929) for species that are distinguished
cauda incertae sedis with the tintinnids. from Undella species by a subapical inner projection
It is well known that the genus C oxliella might of the lorica wall. Laval - Peuto (1994) synonymized
actually have no reality, as loricae of c oxliella form both genera, apparently attributing this difference to
belong to the cell cycles of Favella (Chapter 2 ) and the intrageneric variability of U ndella . As it is unknown
probably several further distantly related genera. whether deviating cytological features accompany this
Accordingly, Corliss (1979) regarded the genus as admittedly small difference, we follow Lynn (2008) in
questionable and replaced the former familial name keeping the genera separate.
Coxliellidae by Metacylididae. Because it is impossible The genus Micrundella was established by Busch
at the current state of knowledge to synonymize all (1948) with three new species, but he omitted to fi x
members of the genus C oxliella with species of other a type. This was remedied by Loeblich Jr & Tappan
genera, we still keep it here as nomen inquirendum (1968) , who made the genus name available (ICZN
(name under enquiry). 1999 ; Aescht 2001 ). The descriptions of the genus
Family Petalotrichidae. Laval - Peuto (1994) regarded and the affi liated species did not provide many details
the genus Parapetalotricha Hada, 1970 as a synonym and were based on very few specimens. Apparently,
of the genus Petalotricha Kent, 1881. According to Busch used the distinctly smaller lorica length (less
Aescht (2001) , the type species,P arapetalotricha meridi- than 20 μ m long) and the presence of perhaps a
ana , was fi xed owing to monotypy of the genus. single macronucleus nodule to distinguish the genus
However, Hada (1970) affi liated simultaneously a from Undella . Because macronucleus nodules might
second species, namely Parapetalotricha entzi . Hence, fuse to a single mass before cell division in tintinnids,
the type species (representative of the genus) is uncer- the occurrence of a single nodule and the smaller
tain and the genus name unavailable. lorica size seem insuffi cient for a generic separation.
Family Undellidae. The genus R otundocylis was Hence, we follow Laval - Peuto (1994) in regarding
established together with its single species, R. arcellop- the genus Micrundella as a synonym of the genus
sis , by Kufferath (1950) , but it was not considered by Undella .
Loeblich Jr & Tappan (1968) in their index to the tintin- Family Xystonellidae. S piroxystonella was established
nids. The double contour of the lorica opening indi- by Kofoid & Campbell (1939) as a subgenus of
cates a small collar and the bowl might have attached Xystonella . Although the lorica outline is typical of
some granules. Thus, the genus is rather similar to Xystonella , the spiraled ridges resemble those of C lima-
Stenosemella , whose bowl is, however, densely agglom- cocylis (compare Fig. 2.1e ). Following Loeblich Jr &
erated. Laval - Peuto (1994) considered the genus a Tappan (1968) , Lynn (2008) regarded S piroxystonella
synonym of U ndella , as Kufferath (1950) also described as a distinct, monotypic genus within the family Xys-
unnamed specimens with loricae lacking “ ornaments ” tonellidae. Corliss (1979) , however, used the similarity
(apparently interpreted as agglomerated particles). withClimacocylis for its affi liation with the Metacylidi-
However, Kufferath mentioned that these specimens dae. According to Laval - Peuto (1994) , S piroxystonella
might represent a distinct species. Without additional scandens might represent a paralorica (replacement

80 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 3.4 Revised classifi cation of extant tintinnid ciliates.
Ascampbelliellidae Corliss, 1960 Tintinnidae Claparè de& Lachmann,1858
Acanthostomella J örgensen,1927 Albatrossiella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Ascampbelliella Corliss, 1960 Amphorellopsis Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Incertae sedis Amphorides Strand, 1928
Luxiella Lecal,1953 Brandtiella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Niemarshallia Corliss, 1960 Bursaopsis Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Cyttarocylididae Kofoid& Campbell,1929 Buschiella Corliss, 1960
Cyttarocylis Fol,1881 Canthariella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Dictyocystidae Haeckel,1873 Clevea Balech,1948
Codonaria Kofoid& Campbell,1939 Dadayiella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Codonella Haeckel,1873 Daturella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Codonellopsis J örgensen,1924 Epicranella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Dictyocysta Ehrenberg, 1854 Eutintinnus Kofoid& Campbell,1939
Incertae sedis Odontophorella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Laackmanniella Kofoid& Campbell,1929 Ormosella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Wangiella Nie,1934 Proamphorella Kofoid& Campbell,1939
Epiplocylididae Kofoid& Campbell,1939 Prostelidiella Kofoid& Campbell,1939
Epicancella Kofoid& Campbell,1929 Rhabdosella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Epiplocylis J örgensen,1924 Salpingacantha Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Epiplocyloides Hada,1938 Salpingella J örgensen,1924
Metacylididae Kofoid& Campbell,1929 Salpingelloides Campbell,1942
Climacocylis J örgensen,1924 Steenstrupiella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Helicostomella J örgensen,1924 Stelidiella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Metacylis J örgensen,1924 Tintinnus Schrank,1803
Pseudometacylis Balech,1968 Tintinnidiidae Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Nolaclusiliidae Sniezek, Capriulo, Small& Russo,1991 Leprotintinnus J örgensen, 1900
Nolaclusilis Snyder& Brownlee,1991 Membranicola Foissner, Berger& Schaumburg,1999
Petalotrichidae Kofoid& Campbell,1929 Tintinnidium Kent, 1881
Petalotricha Kent, 1881 Undellidae Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Ptychocylididae Kofoid& Campbell,1929 Amplectella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Cymatocylis Laackmann,1910 Amplectellopsis Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Favella J örgensen,1924 Cricundella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Protocymatocylis Kofoid& Campbell,1929 Proplectella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Ptychocylis Brandt, 1896 Undella Daday,1887
Wailesia Kofoid& Campbell,1939 Undellopsis Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Rhabdonellidae Kofoid& Campbell,1929 Xystonellidae Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Epirhabdonella Kofoid& Campbell,1939 Parafavella Kofoid& Campbell,1929
Protorhabdonella J örgensen,1924 Parundella J örgensen,1924
Rhabdonella Brandt,1906 Spiroxystonella Kofoid& Campbell,1939
Rhabdonellopsis Kofoid& Campbell,1929 Xystonella Brandt,1906
Schmidingerella Agatha& Str ü der - Kypke,2012 Xystonellopsis J örgensen,1924
Stenosemellidae Campbell,1954 Incertae sedis in tintinnids
Stenosemella J örgensen,1924 Codonopsis Kofoid& Campbell,1939
Poroecus Cleve, 1902
Rhizodomus Strelkow& Wirketis,1950
Rotundocylis Kufferath,1950
Stylicauda Balech, 1951
Tintinnopsis Stein, 1867
Nomen inquirendum
Coxliella Brandt,1906

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 81
lorica) with coxliella form of a Xystonella species. involved in locomotion, except for the halteriids. Merely
Accordingly, she suggested a synonymization of two shortened ciliary rows occur in the oligotrichids,
Spiroxystonella with X ystonella . Admittedly, spiraled whereas more than ten kineties are usually found
structures often occur in paraloricae (Chapter 2 ), but in the aloricate choreotrichid genera Strombidinopsis ,
they are usually not combined with elevated ridges as Parastrombidinopsis , and P arastrombidium (Lynn et al.
inSpiroxystonella . Until we know the cell features and 1991 ; Kim et al. 2005 ; Xu et al. 2007 ) and the tintin-
the cell cycles of the genera Spiroxystonella , Climacocy- nids. The enantiotropic division mode is the most
lis , and X ystonella , the former genus is kept separate important synapomorphy of the halteriids, oligo-
within the family Xystonellidae. trichids, and choreotrichids. The plesiomorphic state,
i.e. the epiapokinetal stomatogenesis, is only found in
the halteriids, whereas the remaining taxa form the
new oral apparatus in an invagination (hypoapoki-
3.7 COMPARISON WITH THE EVOLUTION
netal stomatogenesis). The assumption by Kahl (1932)
OF RELATED PLANKTONIC CILIATES:
that the subsurface development of the new oral
THE ALORICATE CHOREOTRICHIDS,
apparatus became necessary when the membranelles
OLIGOTRICHIDS, AND HALTERIIDS
became responsible for the cell ’ s movement cannot be
supported. The epiapokinetal stomatogenesis in the
The freshwater plankton comprises ciliates from many
planktonic halteriids and the hypoapokinetal stoma-
different classes (Foissner et al. 1999 ), while the
togenesis in the benthic hypotrichs even contradict
marine and brackish water plankton is dominated by
Kahl ’ s hypothesis.
close relatives of the tintinnids: the oligotrichids (e.g.,
Strombidium , T ontonia ), the aloricate choreotrichids
(e.g., Pelagostrobilidium , S trombidinopsis ), and rarely the
The somatic ciliature
halteriids (e.g., P elagohalteria ). Most of these about 140
species were described or redescribed, using protargol
In contrast to the halteriids, oligotrichids, and aloricate
staining, and the SSU rRNA genes have been sequenced
choreotrichids, the somatic ciliature of the tintinnids
in about thirty species (Kim Y. - O. et al. 2010 ). Accord-
is covered with a lorica. The selective forces that affect
ingly, our knowledge about this important group of
the somatic ciliature are thus probably different in lori-
marine plankton ciliates is much better than that
cate and aloricate taxa. However, even among the
about tintinnids. Nevertheless, we again face the
aloricate taxa the length and function of the somatic
problem of poor overlap in the taxa included in the
cilia is different: a mainly sensory function of the
cladistic and genetic analyses. The aim of this section
stubby cilia is assumed in the oligotrichids and alori-
is to show interesting similarities and differences in the
cate choreotrichids (Faur é - Fremiet & Ganier 1970 ),
evolution of tintinnids and their relatives.
whereas the conspicuously long and closely arranged
cilia of the halteriids are probably involved in the
jumping movements. In tintinnids, the somatic cilia
The planktonic life style participate in lorica construction and remove the fecal
material (Chapter 2 ).
The globular, obconical, or ellipsoidal cell shapes found In the halteriids and oligotrichids, the plesiomorphic
in these taxa are common in eupelagic (always living state of the kinetid structure persists, i.e. only the ante-
in the pelagic zone) ciliates, whereas dorsoventrally rior dikinetidal basal bodies are associated with cilia;
fl attened taxa, for example the stichotrichs and hypo- specialized ciliary rows and fi elds are unknown. The
trichs, might only occasionally occur in the pelagic evolution of the kinetid structure is not restricted to
zone of shallow waters. The high percentage of halteri- the lorica - forming tintinnids, but already started
ids, oligotrichids, and choreotrichids, which is not in the aloricate choreotrichids (character 26). The
found in the soil or marine interstitial, is used to name general trend was to form a second cilium at the pos-
the planktonic ciliate community in freshwater “ Oli- terior dikinetidal basal body, to lose the cilium at the
gotrichetea ”. The large collar membranelles of the anterior basal body, and fi nally to lose the unciliated
adoral zone generate water currents for locomotion anterior basal body. The reasons for and the advan-
and suspension feeding. The somatic ciliature is not tages of these structural changes are unknown.

82 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Accordingly, we fi nd dikinetids with only an anterior synapomorphy of the oligotrichids and choreotrichids,
cilium ( Leegaardiella ovalis ; Lynn & Montagnes 1988 ), whereas some tintinnids have secondarily lost this
dikinetids with two cilia (e.g., Strombidinopsis ; Agatha feature.
2003 ), dikinetids with only a posterior cilium (e.g., The cyst surface is covered by often globular or spine -
Lohmanniella ; Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke 2007 ), and shaped structures (lepidosomes) in some stichotrichs,
monokinetids (e.g., Pelagostrobilidium ; Agatha et al. halteriids, oligotrichids, and aloricate choreotrichids, in
2005 ) in the aloricate choreotrichids and tintinnids which they probably developed independently (charac-
(character 26). ter 48; Foissner et al. 2007 and references therein),
Although the oligotrichids are more conservative whereas lepidosomes are apparently lacking in tintin-
than the choreotrichids in the structure of the somatic nids (Chapter 7 ; Van Breemen 1905 ; Laackmann
kinetids and special ciliary components, they are able 1908 ; Meunier 1910, 1919 ; Biernacka 1952 ; Mar-
to create various, occasionally very complex, patterns galef & Dur á n 1953 ; Reid & John 1978 ; Paranjape
with their two ciliary rows, especially with their girdle 1980 ; Davis 1985 ; McManus & Katz 2009 ).
kinety (character 18; Agatha 2004a, 2011 ). Again,
the reasons for and the advantages of these different
patterns are unknown. Like in tintinnids, the clado- The halteriids, an enigmatic ciliate group
gram and gene tree of oligotrichids roughly follow the
evolution of the somatic ciliary patterns, demonstrat- The halteriids are an interesting group of planktonic
ing its importance for inferring the phylogenetic ciliates, as they show some unique morphologic fea-
relationships (Agatha 2004a, b, 2011 ; Agatha & tures and because their phylogenetic relationships
Str ü der - Kypke 2007 , 2012 ). are uncertain. The occurrence of these special char-
acters might cause a long - branch attraction arte-
fact (phenomenon in phylogenetic analyses, mainly
Resting cysts maximum parsimony, incorrectly showing rapidly
evolving lineages to be closely related), resulting in
The analysis of resting cyst data is diffi cult owing to an affi liation of the halteriids with the stichotrichs.
their scarcity (Chapter 7 ). A preformed emergence Distinguishing features of the halteriids are the de
pore closed by a plug occurs in the resting cysts of novo origin of the somatic kineties during morpho-
oligotrichids ( Strombidium ; Agatha et al. 2005 ), alori- genesis (character 43) accompanied by a resorption
cate choreotrichids ( Rimostrombidium , Strombidinopsis ; of the old somatic ciliary rows (character 44; Petz &
S. Agatha, unpublished observations on cysts provided Foissner 1992 ; Song 1993 ; Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke
by A. Saage, University of Kiel, Germany; Ichinomiya 2007 ).
et al. 2004 ), and the tintinnid genus S chmidingerella Further special features concern the conjugation
(McManus & Katz 2009 ; Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke of the halteriids. Although they fuse with their
2012 ). The cysts of stichotrichs and halteriids, anterior ventral cell portions like the oligotrichids
however, lack a preformed emergence pore and the and choreotrichids (character 53; Agatha & Foissner
ciliates thus leave the cyst through rupture of the 2009 and references therein), the formerly globular
wall (character 45; Foissner et al. 2005, 2007 ). Like- conjugation partners form an extraordinary ventral
wise, emergence pores and plugs are absent in the concavity and fi nally obtain an interlocking arrange-
ellipsoidal or globular structures, which probably ment by inserting the left cell side into the partner ’ s
represent the cysts of the tintinnids Acanthostomella furrow. Such a curious arrangement of the partners
(Davis 1985 ), C oxliella (Laackmann 1908 ), H elicosto- is otherwise found only in the aloricate choreotrichid
mella (Laackmann 1908 ; Meunier 1919 ; Paranjape Pelagostrobilidium (Ota & Taniguchi 2003 ; Agatha &
1980 ), Leprotintinnus (Meunier 1910 ; Reid & John Foissner 2009 ) and might represent a convergent
1978 ), Parafavella (Busch 1920 ; Reid & John 1978 ), adaptation to the jumping escape movements per-
Parundella (Paranjape 1980 ), and marine T intinnopsis formed by the two taxa. Further peculiarities of the
species (Plate 7.1; S. Agatha, unpublished observa- halteriid conjugation emphasize the uniqueness of
tions; Meunier 1919 ; Biernacka 1952 ). The most par- this taxon; for details and references, see Agatha &
simonious assumption is that a cyst plug represents a Foissner ( 2009) .

Systematics and evolution of tintinnid ciliates 83
Gene sequence analyses about somatic ciliary pattern development, the capsule
types, and the lorica sac with its foldable closing appa-
In the recently published SSU rRNA gene trees of the ratus seem to be valuable features/feature complexes
oligotrichid ciliates, most basal nodes were statistically for the reconstruction of tintinnid evolution. In the
not well supported, many polytomies could not be closely related oligotrichids and aloricate choreo-
resolved, and paraphylies were recognizable (Gao et al. trichids, the morphologic and molecular trees also
2009 ; Kim Y. - O. et al. 2010 ; Zhang et al. 2 010 ; Liu widely refl ect the development of the somatic ciliary
et al. 2011 ). The paraphyletic oligotrichid genus S trom- patterns.
bidium might, as the genus T intinnopsis , actually com- 3. Origin of the tintinnids. The tintinnids most prob-
prise several genera, but their separation is currently ably originated from marine planktonic ciliates, as
impossible owing to the lack of appropriate morpho- their supposed aloricate ancestor, resembling the
logic features. Other branches of the gene trees are genus Strombidinopsis , was restricted to the marine
well supported by morphologic characters, especially pelagic zone and most tintinnid species occur in this
synapomorphies of the somatic ciliary pattern. The habitat. Tintinnids apparently entered freshwater only
aloricate choreotrichids are paraphyletic in clado- twice, namely at the beginning of their evolution with
grams and gene trees. Both genealogies differ, however, species possessing soft, agglomerated loricae (T intinnid-
in their basal topologies, probably because genetic data ium and M embranicola ) and later with species charac-
on the genera Leegaardiella , Lohmanniella , and Para- terized by the most complex ciliary pattern ( Codonella
strombidium are not available (Agatha & Str ü der - Kypke cratera and Stenosemella lacustris ).
2012 ). 4. Shortcomings. A taxonomic classifi cation should
Despite differences in the evolution of halteriids, oli- refl ect the evolutionary history and natural relation-
gotrichids, and choreotrichids, the SSU rRNA gene ships of organisms. However, the number of tintinnid
trees and the cladograms roughly refl ect in all taxa the species sequenced and studied with modern taxonomic
development of the somatic ciliature, which is thus the methods is currently insuffi cient for a revision of the
most important feature complex in phylogenetic recon- lorica - based sorting, especially as the intraspecifi c vari-
structions. In contrast, the oral ciliature is rather ability is unknown. Furthermore, a reconciliation of
conserved, except for small changes in the aloricate the information provided by gene and morphologic
choreotrichids (character 8). trees is problematic, as the sequenced species usually
were not identifi ed, applying appropriate methods, and
most species descriptions based on modern morpho-
3.8 KEY POINTS logical methods lack gene sequence data.
5. Future efforts. A simultaneous acquisition of both
1. Taxonomic value of the lorica. The phylogenetic genetic and morphologic data and their phylogenetic
relationships inferred from cladistic and genetic anal- analysis are recommended. Because the taxonomic
yses contradict the lorica - based hypothesis of tintin- classifi cation requires distinguishing features for taxa
nid evolution and classifi cation, namely species with diagnoses, detailed morphologic studies on the loricae
hyaline and agglomerated loricae are not separate and cells should be performed, applying live observa-
taxonomic entities. Furthermore, an evolutionary tion, protargol staining, and preferably electron micro-
trend from agglomerated to hyaline loricae is not scopy; permanent slides should be deposited in
evident. However, soft, agglomerated loricae are appar- acknowledged collections. Additionally, the intraspe-
ently restricted to the basal branch of tintinnid evolu- cifi c lorica variability should be studied by cultivation
tion comprising most freshwater species. Taxa with experiments and fl uorescence in situ hybridization
loricae composed of a hyaline collar and an agglomer- (which detects species - specifi c gene sequences). Finally,
ated bowl also group rather well together. the real number of tintinnid species might be estimat-
2. Reliable morphologic characters for phylogenetic ed. One of the most important tintinnids to be rede-
inference. The cladistic analysis of morphologic char- scribed is the type speciesTintinnopsis beroidea , whose
acters and the sequence analysis of the small subunit gene sequence has also to be confi rmed.
ribosomal RNA gene produce rather similar trees of the Once the distinguishing features of most/all species
monophyletic tintinnids. In particular, the hypothesis are known, keys for identifi cation can be established.

84 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Reliable species determination is in turn the base for ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
the investigation of biogeographic patterns as well
as ecological and evolutionary processes, which might The comments and ideas of the other chapter authors
help to understand speciation and the maintenance of are gratefully acknowledged. Sabine Agatha was sup-
diversity in the pelagic realm. To attain these objec- ported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF; Project
tives, synergistic approaches combining the expertise P20461 - B17).
of morphological and molecular taxonomists, ecolo-
gists, and physiologists will be indispensable.

Chapter 4
Ecophysiology
and Behavior
of Tintinnids
David J.S. Montagnes
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
85

86 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
4.1 INTRODUCTION be infi nite in number, but developing a series of meas-
urable points provides a framework for descriptive
Planktonic ciliates are a key component of pelagic food purposes. Thus, to provide structure for ecophysiologi-
webs and are of substantial ecological importance (see, cal issues that will follow, I also present a generalized
Chapter 9 ). Although tintinnids are rarely the main tintinnid, as a consumer of prey (Fig. 4.2 ).
planktonic ciliates (Chapter 9 ), owing to their ease As is described in more detail elsewhere in this
of capture and identifi cation (Chapter 1 ), historically, book (Chapter 1 ), tintinnids possess a ring (or zone) of
they have been extensively studied. In this Chapter, I adoral polykinetids or membranelles surrounding
provide an indication of our understanding of their an oral cavity or infundibulum, the “ fl oor ” of which is
behavior and ecophysiology, primarily from laboratory at least in part covered by the endoral membranelle.
studies, as they provide controlled, reliable measure- Within the oral cavity is an excentrically placed cyto-
ments. Much of these data are then synthesized to stomal region, at the base of which vacuoles form
reveal general and specifi c traits and indicate trends (Fig. 4.2 ). In general, but described in more detail
that may then be applicable to planktonic ciliates and below, the cilia of the adoral membranelles beat, creat-
protists in general. Finally, I contextualize the above ing currents that bring prey to the cytostomal region
observations by indicating how our knowledge of tin- (Fig. 4.2 d), as well as propelling the ciliate; thus, loco-
tinnids may be incorporated into autecological and motion and grazing are linked in tintinnids. Note, the
synecological models. In this way, it is revealed that somatic cilia are covered by the lorica and do not par-
tintinnids may provide useful tools to address larger ticipate in locomotion but seem to help the cell move
issues. Note that in this chapter the species names are within the lorica (see Chapter 3 for details).
those as reported in the literature. Searching, a term extensively used in the literature
on tintinnids and, therefore, adopted here, per se, is
a misnomer, as planktonic grazers rarely “ search ” ;
rather through random swimming they encounter
4.2 FEEDING prey. Regardless, “ searching ” for prey by tintinnids will
be infl uenced by their swimming speed and the fre-
An overview of tintinnid feeding quency of turning, as these will alter the volume of
water encountered. Such behaviors will be affected by
Feeding by tintinnids, as for most protozoa, can be the distribution, abundance, and type of prey and will
divided into discrete, linked steps (Fig. 4.1 ) that may be discussed in more detail later in this section and in
be governed by chemical, physical, or biological cues Section 4.4 , but fi rst I will turn to contact, the next step
(Montagnes et al. 2008 ). These steps could, of course, in feeding.
Fig. 4.1 Feeding steps of tintinnids. As detailed in the text, the ciliate swims, processing water and searching for prey.
Contact is then made, often with the cilia. Capture will then occur, but prey may be rejected at this point. Once captured, prey
are moved into the cytostomal region where they are processed into a food vacuole. Next, prey are digested, and any
indigestible part is egested through the cell anus (or cytopyge, see Fig. 4.2 ).

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 87
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 4.2 The generalized tintinnid consumer. (a) An indication of how a tintinnid will capture and process prey; white
arrows represent the general fl ow of water; dark arrows indicate the processing of food in a vacuole within the cell; the dotted
lines at the top of the ciliate represent the area of encounter that can be approximated by the equation (r , tintinnid radius;
t
r , prey radius). (b, c) Indications of tentaculoids and striae with permission, redrawn from Agatha (2009) . (d) A prediction
p
of the fl ow of water through the membranelles of a tintinnid, based on work on the naked oligotrich Lohmanniella spiralis
(Jonsson 1986 ). (e) An indication of the structure of the endoral membranelle, lying on the base of the cytosomal region
(note this scanning electron micrograph is from a naked ciliate, not a tintinnid).
C ontact probability between the tintinnid and its encounter includes the transactional region around
prey will increase with both increasing predator and the oral area, defi ned by the radius of the prey (Fig.
prey size; note “ p rey size” may be an ambiguous term 4.2 ). Thus, larger prey might be assumed to be encoun-
as it typically refers to a diameter, but prey are rarely tered and, consequently, ingested with a higher prob-
spherical; still this is the simplifi ed practice of the disci- ability, but see Sections on selectivity on pages 96 and
pline, which is adopted here. Following very simple 9 8. Note also that chemical signals will increase this
mechanistic principles, initially ignoring prey size if encounter area beyond the cell and cilia, as the prey
they are small, and considering only physical proper- may exude material that the ciliate may sense (see Sec-
ties, the maximum encounter area by a feeding tintin- tion “ Selectivity other than size ” on page 98 ). Further-
nid will be equal to the area of its oral region, although more, video observations of F avella sp. indicate that
this may include the oral cilia if they are sensory different regions of the oral zone can preferentially
(Fenchel 1 986; Fig. 4 .2) , and therefore they too may retain particles (Stoecker et al. 1995 ), so in fact treating
need to be measured. Furthermore, when prey are the entire oral surface as uniform is undoubtedly
large, their size must also be considered, as the area of simplistic, although it may be appropriate for most

88 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
applications. Furthermore, prey that collide with the uted (see, for example, Chapter 9 ). Therefore, this argu-
oral cilia are often not captured (Blackbourn 1974 ), ment for the lorica acting as an adaptive trait to
so effi ciency is not 100% (see Box 4 .1) . Finally, ciliates improve feeding when prey are abundant lacks verac-
may sense movement of the prey through mechnore- ity (see Chapter 1 for a further discussion of the purpose
ception (Fenchel 1 987; Hausmann et al. 2 003) , but the of the lorica). Note though that there is some support
extent to which such behavior occurs in tintinnids is for the argument that the lorica can help to act as a sea
undetermined. Clearly, the behavior of these ciliates is anchor. Jonsson et al. ( 2004) indicate that when Eutin-
complex! tinnus inquilinus uses its lorica to attach to particles in
A second physical property that will infl uence the water column it can increase its feeding rate by up
contact is the speed at which predator and prey move. to 80%, so the concept bears further exploration.
In work that examined T intinnopsis dadayi feeding on Swimming behavior will be examined in more detail
a range of prey, Verity (1991a) modeled the effect in Section 4 .4, but it is noteworthy that tintinnids feed
of swimming speed and predator encounter area on and grow on a range of prey, including non - motile
encounter rate, using Equation 4 .1 (from Gerritsen & diatoms and highly motile dinofl agellates (Table 4 .1) ;
Strickler 1 977) , where encounter rate ( E) is a function thus, although prey motility may, in theory, increase
of prey concentration ( P) , prey speed ( u ), predator the rate of contact, it is far from essential. Another
speed (v ), and predator encounter radius (r ), mechanism that should increase encounter rate is tur-
bulence in the water column (Shimeta et al. 1995 ), as
πr2P u2+3v2 it effectively increases the speed of both ciliates and
E= × (4.1)
3 v their prey and may affect organisms the size of larger
tintinnids (Ki ø rboe 2008 ). However, the work on tin-
B ased on estimated rates of a range of prey, Verity tinnids that has assessed the effect of turbulence on
(1991a) concluded that prey speed had little infl uence feeding (Shimeta et al. 1 995) suggests either no infl u-
on encounter (predator speed was not considered), ence on Favella sp. or a reduced clearance rate (for a
whereas encounter radius of the tintinnid did. At least, defi nition of clearance rate see Box 4 .1) of Helicosto-
this work suggests we should focus on tintinnid and mella sp. The latter observation was attributed to
prey size when considering contact, although as we feeding inhibition through some mechanical distur-
will see later in this chapter, the swimming behavior of bance (see Kiø r boe 2 008 for an overview of such
the tintinnid will alter prey capture. inhibitory processes). Similar, negative effects on
The fl ow of water past a ciliate’ s feeding structure is feeding, attributed to turbulence- i nduced behavioral
greater when it is attached to a surface, and thus the changes, occur for the naked oligotrich Strombidium
probability of contact with prey will be greatest for (Dolan et al. 2 003) . Thus, the sparse data available on
attached ciliates when prey are at saturating levels; turbulence suggest more negative than positive impacts
when prey are scarce searching will play a greater role on feeding in planktonic ciliates.
in contact, and thus attachment would be a disad- Once contact has occurred, the prey must be cap-
vantage (Fenchel 1 987) . Although tintinnids are not tured and processed or, possibly, rejected . Although there
generally permanently attached, residing in a lorica are no good estimates of water fl ow through the oral
could reduce their speed, relative to naked oligotrichs. structures of tintinnids, there has been work con-
We might then conclude that, when prey are scarce, ducted onLohmanniella spiralis ( = Strobilidium spiralis ,
the lorica reduces encounter rate by reducing swim- Pelagostrobilidium spirale ) a closely related aloricate oli-
ming speed but increases the fl ow of water past the gotrich that is structurally and functionally similar
oral region (i.e., a greater amount of water is pro- in feeding behavior to tintinnids (Jonsson 1986 ). In
cessed). Thus, by acting as a “ s ea anchor” the lorica L. spiralis the adoral membranelles are orientated so
might provide a selective advantage over naked (i.e., that their beating propels water between them and out
aloricate) ciliates when prey are abundant, and search- of from the peristomal infundibulum, transporting
ing is not a priority but processing water is. This is water and food particles into the oral region from the
an entertaining argument for the function of the anterior of the cell (Fig. 4 .2) . Jonsson ( 1986) estimated
lorica. However, in Section 4.4 I indicate that tin- the fi ltering area of L. spiralis to be approximately
tinnids seem to swim as fast, or faster, than their alori- 3.7 × 103 μ m2 with a current velocity through the
cate relatives. Furthermore, tintinnids are common membranelles of 1.6 × 103 μ m s− 1 , suggesting a fl ow
in oligotrophic waters, where prey are sparsely distrib- rate of 21 μ l h− 1, a theoretical value near his observed

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 89
Table 4.1 An indication of prey types that do (+ ) and do not (− ) support tintinnid growth in monocultures. Note these data
do not consider the concentration of potential prey or the age of the prey cultures, both of which may alter the ability for
tintinnids to grow. Furthermore, prey that do not support growth may be consumed. Prey sizes (in micrometers) are
approximate linear values, based on averages reported in the literature and should not be considered as accurate; they are
provided to indicate a rough range. The interested reader is advised to examine the cited works for details. * , β - chitin threads
on diatoms were removed by shaking; (cid:49), a prey that was considered either toxic or potentially toxic to aquatic organisms;
“ clone ” refers to a case where one clone of a species supported growth, whereas another did not; “ poor ” refers to growth but
at a very low level. References: (1) Apple et al. 2011 ; (2) Clough & Strom 2005 ; (3) Fulco 2007 ; (4) Graham & Strom 2010 ;
(5) Hansen 1989 ; (6) Hansen 1995 ; (7) Hansen et al. 1992 ; (8) Jakobsen et al. 2001 ; (9) Kamiyama 1997a ; (10) Kamiyama
1997b ; (11) Kamiysma & Arima 1997 ; (12) Kamiyama & Suzuki 2006 ; (13) Kamiyama et al. 2005 ; (14) Rosetta & McManus
2003 ; (15) Stoecker & Evans 1985 ; (16) Stoecker et al. 1981 ; (17) Taniguchi & Takeda 1988 ; (18) Verity 1991a ; (19) Verity
& Stoecker 1982 ; (20) Verity & Villareal 1986 .
Class Prey Size Tintinnid Toxicity Growth Reference
Bacillariophyceae Chaetoceros sp. 10 Tintinnopsis − (20)
vasculum
Cyclotella caspia 5 Tintinnopsis − / + * (20)
vasculum
Cyclotella 7 Tintinnopsis − / + * (20)
meneghiniana vasculum
M inutocellus 3 Tintinnopsis + (20)
polymorphus vasculum
Thalassiosira 7 Tintinnopsis − / + * (20)
constricta vasculum
T halassiosira 4 Tintinnopsis − / + * (20)
oceanica vasculum
Thalassiosira 4 Tintinnopsis − / + * (20)
pseudonana vasculum
Thalassiosira sp. 4 Tintinnopsis − / + * (20)
vasculum
Bicoecida Bicoea cf. m aris 5 Tintinnopsis + (18)
dadayi
Cafeteria sp. 3 Tintinnopsis + (18)
dadayi
Pseudobodo cf. 4 Tintinnopsis + (18)
tremulans dadayi
Chlorophyceae Dunaliella 8 Tintinnopsis + (18)
tertiolecta dadayi
Chroococcales Synechococcus 1 Eutintinnus sp. (cid:49) − (1)
sp.
Synechococcus 1 Metacylis sp. (cid:49) − (1)
sp.
Chrysophyceae Paraphysomonas 7 Tintinnopsis + (18)
sp. dadayi
Dinophyceae Alexandrium 30 Favella (cid:49) − (7)
ostenfeldii ehrenbergii
Alexandrium 30 Eutintinnus sp. (cid:49) − (3)
tamarense
Alexandrium 30 Favella (cid:49) + (13)
tamarense taraikaensis
Continued

90 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 4.1 Continued
Class Prey Size Tintinnid Toxicity Growth Reference
Alexandrium 30 Favella (cid:49) + (12)
tamarense taraikaensis
Alexandrium 30 Favella (cid:49) − (3)
tamarense taraikaensis
Alexandrium 30 Favella (cid:49) + / − clone (5)
tamarense ehrenbergii dependent
Amphidinium 15 Favella − (16)
carterae ehrenbergii
G onyaulax 35 Favella + (16)
polyedre ehrenbergii
Gonyaulax 30 Favella + (16)
tamarensis ehrenbergii
Gyrodinium 25 Favella (cid:49) − (6)
aureolum ehrenbergii
Heterocapsa 15 Favella (cid:49) + (10)
circularisquama taraikaensis
Heterocapsa 15 Favella (cid:49) + (11)
circularisquama taraikaensis
Heterocapsa 15 Favella azorica (cid:49) + (9)
circularisquama
Heterocapsa sp. 25 Favella + (16)
ehrenbergii
H eterocapsa 20 Favella + (10)
triquetra taraikaensis
Heterocapsa 20 Favella azorica + (10)
triquetra
Heterocapsa 20 Favella + (6)
triquetra ehrenbergii
Heterocapsa 20 Favella sp. + (4)
triquetra
Katodinium 7 Tintinnopsis + (18)
rotundatum dadayi
P rorocentrum 15 Favella poor+ (16)
mariaelebouriae ehrenbergii
Prorocentrum 15 Eutintinnus − (14)
minimum pectinis
Prorocentrum 15 Eutintinnus (cid:49) − (14)
minimum pectinis
Prorocentrum 15 Favella (cid:49) + (14)
minimum ehrenbergii
Prorocentrum 15 Favella + (17)
minimum taraikaensis
P rorocentrum 15 Metacylis (cid:49) + (14)
minimum angulata
Scrippsiella 25 Favella + (16)
trochoidea ehrenbergii
S crippsiella 20 Eutintinnus sp. + (3)
trochoidea
Scrippsiella 20 Favella + (3)
trochoidea taraikaensis
Heterocapsa 10 Favella sp. + (19)
pygmaea

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 91
Table 4.1 Continued
Class Prey Size Tintinnid Toxicity Growth Reference
Pelagophyceae Aureoumbra 5 Amphorides sp. (cid:49) − (8)
lagunensis quadrilineata
Prymnesiophyceae Isochrysis 5 Amphorides sp. + (8)
galbana sp. quadrilineata
I sochrysis 5 Metacylis sp. + (4)
galbana
Isochrysis 3 Tintinnopsis + (18)
galbana dadayi
Isochrysis 3 Tintinnopsis sp. + (19)
galbana sp. tubulosoides
Isochrysis 3 Eutintinnus + (14)
galbana pectinis
Isochrysis 3 Tintinnopsis + (20)
galbana vasculum
Prymnesium 10 Eutintinnus (cid:49) − (14)
parvum pectinis
Prymnesium 10 Favella (cid:49) + (14)
parvum ehrenbergi
Prymnesium 10 Metacylis (cid:49) + (14)
parvum angulata
Pyrenomonadaceae Rhodomonas lens 10 Eutintinnus + (14)
pectinus
R hodomonas sp. 10 Coxliella sp. − (2)
Rhodomonas sp. 10 Eutintinnus sp. + (2)
Rhodomonas sp. 10 Favella − (17)
taraikaensis
Rhodomonas sp. 10 Metacylis sp. − (2)
Raphidophyceae Heterosigma 15 Coxliella sp. (cid:49) − (2)
akashiwo
Heterosigma 15 Eutintinnus sp. (cid:49) + / − (2)
akashiwo
Heterosigma 15 Favella sp. (cid:49) − (4)
akashiwo
Heterosigma 15 Favella (cid:49) − (17)
akashiwo taraikaensis
Heterosigma 15 Metacylis sp. (cid:49) − (4)
akashiwo
Heterosigma 15 Metacylis sp. (cid:49) − (2)
akashiwo
Olisthodiscus 10 Favella sp. (cid:49) − (19)
luteus
Olisthodiscus 10 Tintinnopsis − (18
luteus dadayi
O listhodiscus 10 Tintinnopsis sp. (cid:49) − (19)
luteus sp. tubulosoides
Ciliate Balanion sp. 33 Favella sp. ( 15)

92 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
maximum clearance rate for this species of 26 μ l h− 1 ; reversal of cilia (Blackbourn 1974 ; Stoecker et al.
note, on suboptimal particles, where capture effi ciency 1995 ). My own observations also suggest that rejec-
was lower, the apparent maximum clearance was an tion of prey may occur by rapid motion of the endoral
order of magnitude lower. Although slightly higher, membranelle, analogous to a tongue that fl icks prey
these values generally agree with estimates for tintin- away. In contrast, others indicate that reversal of
nids (see Table 4.2) . It is an appealing notion to con- adoral membranelles may result in prey removal (Tan-
sider the oral structure as a simple fi ltration system, iguchi & Takeda 1988 ; Stoecker et al. 1995 ). Regard-
but as will be seen below, there may be substantial less of the specifi c mechanism, it is clear that tintinnids
“ handling ” of prey before it is ingested. are capable of selecting against prey that have been
Of all the planktonic ciliates, tintinnids best lend captured, and are thus far from passive fi lter - or
themselves to the observation of prey capture and suspension - feeders (Stoecker 1988 ).
rejection, as they may be immobilized without damag- Ciliary action may not be the only method of prey
ing the cell; thus they act as useful models for other capture . Extrusomes are a structure common to many
ciliates, especially the numerically dominant naked ciliates, some of which contain toxins to paralyze prey
oligotrichs and choreotrichs (Chapter 9 ) , which they and others contain adhesive substances to retain prey
are closely related to (Chapter 3 ). For instance, Favella (Lynn 2008 ; Hausmann et al. 2003 ). Some tintinnids
taraikaensis was held stationary by trapping its lorica possess specialized extrusomes, called “ capsules ” ,
in petroleum jelly on a microscope slide (Taniguchi & contained within thread - like “ striae ” , which then
Takeda 1988 ), and Favella sp. was held by a complex have a beaded appearance (Fig. 4.2 c; Laval - Peuto et
method using among other compounds egg albumen, al. 1979 ). Tintinnids may also possess tentaculoids,
to tether the lorica to a slide (Stoecker et al. 1995 ). fl ap - shaped cytoplasmic extensions inserting between
Also, as the lorica appears to prevent tintinnids from the adoral membranelles that contain extrusomes
rapidly jumping, a trait exhibited by many of their (Fig. 4.2 b). By observing fed and unfed tintinnids,
close, naked relatives (see Gilbert 1 994 ; Jakobsen Capriulo et al. (1986) revealed that tintinnids pos-
2001 ), this allows researchers to follow them under a sessed signifi cantly more striae when fed, suggesting
microscope. this is a mechanism for increasing prey capture; i.e.,
Blackbourn (1974) made careful observations of the ciliate expends energy on striae production when
free - swimming tintinnids and indicated that when prey are abundant. Again, the implication is that tin-
small (4 – 10 μ m) particles were ingested, the ciliate tinnids are not simple fi lter feeders. We might extend
underwent a slight “ shudder ” , whereas ingestion of this physically observable method of prey capture and
larger items resulted in an interruption of motion, predict that like other protozoa, tintinnids also use
often with the outer adoral membranelles bent unobservable (molecular) methods, such as ligands, to
inward, possibly to prevent prey escaping and the inner bind to and capture prey (see Roberts et al. (2011) for
membranelles forcing the prey into the oral region. a review on this subject); although no data exist to
This parallels observations by Stoecker et al. (1995) support this for tintinnids, there is clear evidence for
who noted cilia reversal aided in prey capture. Black- chemosesory abilities (see section “ Selectivity other
bourn (1974) also suggested that the “ oral plug ” , a than size ” on page 98 ), and it might be assumed such
structure at the base of the oral region is used as a mechanisms exist.
“ pump ” , somehow aiding in prey processing; this Besides direct observations of prey rejection, several
oral plug is likely to be the endoral membranelle studies have experimentally indicated that tintinnids
(Fig. 4.2 ), although it could also be a contractile exhibit prey preference (Table 4.1) . For instance,
portion of the cell within the oral cavity. In general, for Tintinnopsis tubulosa prefers yeast to carbon particles
Favella taraikaensis , processing of prey takes approxi- (Spittler 1973 ); E utintinnus pectinis prefers one prey
mately 10 – 100 s (Taniguchi & Takeda 1988 ) and fl agellate over another (Heinbokel 1978a ); F avella
between 2 – 8 s for some other tintinnids (Blackbourn ehrenbergii prefers dinofl agellates over other similarly
1974 ); the extent to which this applies to tintinnids is sized prey (Stoecker et al. 1981 ); Favella sp. prefers
unknown. live prey over latex polystyrene beads of similar size,
Prey may be rapidly r ejected from the oral region beads over heat killed dinofl agllates, and shows other
(Taniguchi & Takeda 1988 ). For instance, particles prey preferences, including a preference for non -t oxic
may be expelled from the cytopharyngeal region by species over toxic ones (Stoecker 1988 ; Strom and

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 93
Loukos 1998 ; Graham & Strom 2010 , respectively). abundance, the functional response , as it both reveals
Finally, Verity (1991a) indicated preference for prey, behavioral traits and is central to incorporating ciliates
between similar - sized fl agellates and through rather into food - web models (see section “ Incorporation of
elegant analysis suggested that this preference was tintinnids into models ” on page 118 ). The above descrip-
based on rejection, rather than encounter. Thus, there tion of tintinnid prey capture and processing (see
is rather conclusive evidence that tintinnids can be section “ An overview of tintinnid feeding ” on page 86 )
particular in their diet. reveals two discrete steps: prey - encounter (searching –
Once captured, tintinnids i ngest prey through a contact) and prey - processing (capture – egestion); these
defi ned cytostomal region and form a vacuole around lend support for the argument that tintinnids, like
either single (Taniguchi & Takeda 1988 ) or multiple many other organisms, exhibit a typical type II func-
(Stoecker 1984 ) prey; as for many ciliates, the forma- tional response (Ki ø rboe 2008 ), homologous in its fun-
tion of the food vacuole, from existing membrane, damental mechanism to Michaelis –M enton enzyme
may ultimately be the limiting step in feeding when kinetics, with the contact rate increasing at a decreas-
food is abundant (see Box 4.1 and Fig. 4.2 ; Haus- ing rate with prey abundance, until it becomes
mann et al. 2003 ); although it must be recognized constant at satiation (Fig. 4.3 ); this process can be
that this is a complex, and poorly examined, process, mechanistically modeled by Equation 4.2 (Box 4.1 ),
and other limiting steps may exist in tintinnids. where predator ingestion rate ( I , prey per predator per
Digestion is then within food vacuoles, by hydrolytic day) varies with prey concentration (P , prey per mil-
enzymes that reduce pH and allow nutrient absorp- liliter), I is the maximum ingestion rate (the recipro-
max
tion (see Hausmann et al. (2003) and Hausmann & cal of handling or processing time), and k is the prey
½
Bradbury (1996) for a more detailed general descrip- concentration that elicits half I (k = I /maximum
max ½ max
tion). Egestion (the removal of undigested material) clearance rate); for a description of this process associ-
follows, with fecal material, at times composed of the ated with protozoa in general, see Fenchel (1986) .
products of more than one prey, being within the
same size range as the prey; at least this occurred I P
I= kma +x
when Favella sp. consumed the thecate dinofl agellate (4.2)
P
1/2
Heterocapsa triquetra (Stoecker 1984 ). Older reports
on tintinnids indicate that they possess a defi ned
region where egestion occurs, the so - called “ cell
anus ” , or cytopyge (see, for example, Campbell 1927 ;
Fig. 4.2 ); the presence of a cytopyge has been more
recently observed on several tintinnids (S. Agatha,
personal communication). Egested material is gener-
ally so small (∼ 10 μ m) that it will not sink quickly and
is undoubtedly remineralized by planktonic bacteria;
thus egested nutrients are maintained suspended in
the upper water column, rather than being exported
to below the thermocline. Similarly, excreted mate-
rial (the end - products of metabolized food), such as
nitrogenous wastes, will be released by diffusion and
used by bacteria or autotrophs. Thus, tintinnids act
as re - mineralizers of nutrients within their local envi-
ronment (see Chapter 9 ).
Fig. 4.3 The functional response. Ingestion rate increases
Functional r esponse
to the asymptote I in the typical response (solid line), with
max
the response reaching half the asymptotic level at k .
½
Possibly the best studied and potentially most impor- However, behavioral changes (see text) with prey abundance
tant ecophysiological response associated with tin- may “ increase ” or “ reduce ” the response closer to the origin.
tinnids is their change in ingestion rate with prey Also, high prey abundance may “ inhibit ” feeding.

94 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Box 4.1 Derivation of the functional response
Let us assume that there are two activities involved Thus, by determining the functional response, by
when a tintinnid consumes a prey: s earching for the measuring tintinnid ingestion at a range of prey abun-
prey and handling of the prey. In tintinnids, handling dances, Equation B4.2 can be fi t to the data; e.g.,
is the time to capture a prey item and to form a food by nonlinear curve- fi tting methods (see Montagnes &
vacuole around it, and ultimately the limiting step is Berges (2 004 )), and I and k can be determined.
max ½
likely the re- processing of vacuole membrane to allow Both of these parameters have biological meaning. The
new vacuole formation (Fig. 4.2 ). We will also assume inverse of I is the time required by a tintinnid to
max
(although this may not be so, and possibly this should process a prey item ( T ). Also, I / k = a , which is the
h max ½
be tested), that the tintinnid cannot actively search amount of water processed by a tintinnid per unit
for prey when it is processing the prey; i.e., the two time (assuming the 100% capture effi ciency); this is
processes are mutually exclusive, so that the total also referred to as the “ maximum clearance rate” .
time (T ) for the tintinnid to capture prey is Here I would like to add a word of caution. Much of
total
T = T + T . However, we are generally inter- the older (and some of the newer) literature on tintinnids
total search handle
ested in the prey consumed ( P ) over the total time and other micro- and mesozooplankton provides data
c
( T ) so that we can determine an ingestion rate (prey on the relationship between “ clearance rate” and prey
total
per unit time). abundance (Fig. B 4.1 ); in this case, “ clearance rate” is
The total time associated with handling (T ) will an artifi cial construct, and in my view this relationship
handle
be the product of the time to handle a single prey ( T ) should not be reported. In all cases for tintinnids, inges-
h
and the number of prey consumed (P ) over a defi ned tion rate is the variable that is directly measured, even
c
time: P T . Also, a tintinnid will consume several prey when the loss of prey from a system is measured rather
c h
( P ) over a defi ned searching period (T ). Assuming than direct uptake. The change in clearance rate with
c search
the tintinnid has a constant searching rate (a , the prey abundance is then inappropriately determined by
volume of water processed per time), contact will dividing ingestion (prey per time) by prey abundance
depend on the prey abundance (P , prey per volume). (prey per volume); this is homologous to the heinous
This can be expressed as P = aPT , or T = error of autocorrelation by plotting 1/x versus x (Berges
c search search
P / aP. Note, in this simple case, we assumed that if 1997 ). The only useful term that could be obtained from
c
contact is made, then the prey is captured; i.e., there the plot of clearance rate versus prey is the y - intercept,
is 100% effi ciency in capture. However, the relation- which is maximum clearance rate ( a ). However, this
ship holds if capture effi ciency is constant and less can be more readily and accurately determined from
than 100%; in contrast, if it varies with prey abundance, a = I / k , which can then be used in a relative manner
max ½
then the shape of the functional response (Fig. 4 .3 ) will to determine the capture effi ciency of various prey. In
be altered. conclusion, given that a can be obtained as described
The above information can now be substituted into above from Equation B4.2, there is no need to present
T = T + T , and T = P / aP + P T ; this can clearance rate versus prey concentration (e.g., Fig.
total search handle total c c h
be rearranged to provide Equation B4.1, representing B4.1), and the literature that does so only adds to
the type II functional response (Kiø rboe 2 008 ). confusion, rather than recording trends.
aPT
P = (B4.1)
c 1+TaP
h
The inverse of handling time is the maximum inges-
tion rate (I , i.e., assuming the tintinnid has ample
max
food available, the only process limiting food capture
is the time taken to process a prey item); thus 1/T = I .
h max
Also, T and a can be combined, where k = 1/T a ,
h ½ h
which is the half - saturation constant, the prey abun-
dance that elicits 0.5 I . Equation B4.1 can then be
max
rewritten as,
P c = kI max +P P (B4.2) F cli eg a. r aB n4 c. e1 r a T teh e a nin da pp rp er yo . priate relationship between
1/2

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 95
The units and dimensions of the axes of the func- increase at low prey abundances (Section 4.4 ), which
tional response vary between studies. Often, prey would alter the shape of the curve by increasing
numbers are used (prey ingested per predator per unit encounter rate and hence making the curve rise earlier
time versus prey abundance). Alternatively, prey are ( “ increased ” ; Fig. 4.3 ). In practice, such variations
converted to carbon, through direct measurements or near the origin of the type II response are exceed-
by converting easily measured biovolumes to carbon ingly diffi cult to recognize, and so far no studies have
(e.g., see Montagnes et al. 1994 ; Menden -D euer & revealed a signifi cant deviation from a type II response
Lessard 2000 ). Less frequently, ingestion is presented for tintinnids.
as specifi c ingestion, the biomass uptake by the tin- In contrast, a response that is regularly observed for
tinnids divided by its biomass content, but as we will tintinnids, and other planktonic ciliates, is feeding
see in the section “ Cell size, number, and growth inhibition at high prey abundance (inhibition; Fig.
rate ” on page 105 , tintinnid size may change with 4.3 ). The reason for this has not, to my knowledge,
prey abundance, so applying a single estimate of tin- been directly studied, but given that both physical and
tinnid biomass, would likely be inappropriate in these chemical cues can negatively affect tintinnid behavior
estimates. (Sections 4.4 and 4.5 ), it is likely that these play a
There are several methods used to estimate ingestion role in inhibition. Ultimately, it may be useful to assess
rate. Laboratory studies tend to measure either the and parameterize type III and inhibition responses, as
uptake of prey directly or the loss of prey from the they may alter model predictions (e.g., Harrison 1995 ;
culture container. Particles that have been used for Montagnes & Lessard 1999 ).
uptake experiments include starch particles, fl uores- However, for now let us assume a type II response.
cent beads, heat - killed and stained fl agellates, live fl ag- In which case, the parameters ( I , k ) will also vary
max ½
ellates that differ from those previously fed to the depending on several factors. For instance, the prey
tintinnids, and radioisotope - labeled prey; for an over- and predator size will both alter the encounter area
view of methods see B å mstedt et al. (2000) . Studies (Fig. 4.2 ), and the speed at which the predator and
that examine the depletion of prey over time use a prey move will alter the encounter rate (Gerritsen &
range of living prey and of course must account for Strickler 1977 ). Furthermore, prey and predator size
prey growth, which is generally measured in “ con- will infl uence the maximum ingestion rate, as large
trols ” that lack predators (see B å mstedt et al. 2000 ). predators may be capable of processing prey more
Regardless of the method, the measurement that is rapidly, and small prey may be ingested more easily
made is the removal of particles by tintinnids (prey per than large prey, although very small prey may be less
predator per unit time), rather than any estimate of accessible. A summary of data on tintinnids ingestion
the amount of water processed by the tintinnid (volume rates reveals considerable variation in the responses
per predator per unit time), as is often cited (see Box (Fig. 4.4 and Table 4.2 ), which is not surprising as
4.1 ). The ingestion data that I have examined in these studies were conducted on a range of species,
this Chapter are primarily laboratory - based (as these of different sizes, feeding on a range of prey. We
provide controlled estimates) and have then been con- can, however, see this variation in the responses by
verted to carbon, using literature values. Although not tintinnids as being extremely informative; given their
ideal for all purposes, this conversion allows compari- diversity, it may be possible to use tintinnids alone
son, which in this instance is my main aim; the reader to investigate cross - taxa trends relevant to planktonic
is directed to the literature (Table 4.2 ) for details on ciliates.
specifi c responses. In fact, there may be fundamental principles guiding
Several of the processes described above will modify the variation of the responses. For instance, given that
the shape of the functional response (Fig. 4.3 ). For feeding is based on the amount of water processed by
instance, if the tintinnid searching rate were to the ciliate, and this should be proportional to the oral
decrease at low prey concentrations, or if when prey area, we might expect that the maximum clearance
were scarce the area of encounter was to decrease rate ( I / k ; Box 4.1 ) is proportional to the oral area,
max ½
in size, then a type III response ( “ reduced ” ; Fig. 4.3 ) and specifi cally in tintinnids, the square of the oral
would be expected; see Ki ø rboe (2008) for more on lorica diameter; there appears to be some evidence for
type II and III responses. Alternatively, tintinnid swim- this (Fig. 4.5 a). Also, if, as indicated by Dolan (2010) ,
ming speed (or at least relative displacement rate) may preferred prey size increases with lorica oral diameter

96 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 4.2 Parameters associated with the feeding of tintinnids. Values for I , k , and maximum clearance are described in
max ½
the text (see Box 4.1 ). Data for responses were either obtained directly from the literature or were estimated from data derived
from fi gures presented in the literature (i.e., curves were fi t through the obtained data to determine parameters). All values
were rounded to two signifi cant fi gures. Note also that responses are not temperature corrected, and experimental temperatures
are presented. The observed maximum ingestion is presented when feeding inhibition occurred at high prey levels and was
obtained visually for fi gures. Note, when the response does not reach an asymptote (e.g., the highest response in Fig. 4.5 ),
thenI is not necessarily the maximum obtained ingestion rate; it is a predicted maximum at an unrealistically high prey
max
concentration and must not be seen as a real maximum. All I and k values are presented in terms of carbon, which were
max
converted to carbon from prey volume when necessary, by either using estimates provided within the text of the relevant
papers or converted using predictions of Menden - Deuer & Lessard (2000) . References (Ref): (1) Hansen et al. 1991 ;
(2), Heinbokel 1978a ; (3) Jakobsen et al. 2001 ; (4) Kamiyama et al. 2005 ; (5) Verity 1985 ; (6) Verity 1991 .
Ciliate Prey Prey Prey I Maximum k Maximum °C Ref
max ½
length biomass (ngC observedI (ngC clearance
max
(μm) (pgC) d−1) (ngCd−1) ml−1) rate ( μLh−1)
Amphorides Isochrysis 5 6.82 4.0 3.7 50 3.3 21 (4)
quadrilineata galbana
Eutintinnus Isochrysis 5 – 13 8.2 140 3.9 18 (2)
pectinis galbana
Favella Heterocapsa 20 507 120 100 150 33 18 (1)
ehrenbergii triqetra
Favella Alexandrium 30 585 39 36 49 33 15 (4)
tamarense tamerense
Helicostomella Isochrysis 5, 5, 8 – 4.6 4.0 43 4.5 18 (2)
subulata galbana,
Monochrysis
lutheri,
Dunaliella
tertiolecta
Tintinnopsis Isochrysis 5 – 23 9.2 430 2.2 18 (2)
acuminate galbana,
Monochrysis
lutheri
Tintinnopsis Isochrysis 3.4 4.0 3.4 57 2.9 20 (5)
acuminate galbana
Tintinnopsis Katodinium 7 40.8 17 13 146 4.8 20 (6)
dadayi rotundatum
plus other
prey
Tintinnopsis Dicrateria 5 10.5 18 5.8 71 11 20 (5)
vasculum inornata
(Fig. 4.5 b), and we make the assumption that prey of a Size selectivity
larger size (relative to the lorica oral diameter) are more
time consuming to process, then maximum ingestion Given the well accepted notion that planktonic ecosys-
rate might increase with lorica diameter; there seems tems are size - structured and that there is a tendency
to be some evidence for this, although the support for for planktonic organisms to consume prey that are
the relationship is not great (Fig. 4.5c ). Clearly, there roughly one - tenth their size (Azam et al. 1983 ; Hansen
will be several factors that alter the functional response. et al. 1994 ), it is not surprising that effort has been
These are briefl y examined below, with some examples focused on estimating the size of prey consumed
and an indication of how they might act. by tintinnids. Rather than considering the cell ’ s oral

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 97
region as an area of encounter, most studies have (Heinbokel 1978b ) or 45% (Capriulo 1990 ), which are
focused on the much easier to measure diameter of the based on both prey within tintinnids and prey removed
lorica as a correlate with prey size (typically prey diam- from the environment (presumably by tintinnids).
eter). This has been most recently reviewed by Dolan Thus, tintinnids may typically consume prey that are
(2010) , who indicated that, based on ingested mate- smaller than previously considered, although there are
rial, tintinnids prefer prey that are approximately 20% records of tintinnids consuming very large particles,
of their lorica diameter (Fig. 4.5 b) and will on average up to 80 – 100% of their lorical diameter (Capriulo
consume prey that are no more than 30% of the lorica 1982 ; Kamiyama & Arima 2001 ).
diameter. These, improved, estimates deviate from Of similar consequence to food - web structure is a
the well - cited values of maximum prey size of 43% consideration of the minimum size of prey consumed
by tintinnids. Many tintinnids are capable of consum-
ing picoplankton ( < 2 μ m), and for smaller tintinnid
species prey that are 2– 5 μ m may be a dominant
dietary component (Bernard & Rassoulzadegan 1993 ).
Furthermore Turner & Tester (1992) indicated that
Favella panamensis consumes labeled E scherichia coli
(∼ 2 × 0.5 μ m) when exposed to abundances of approx-
imately 5 × 10 6 ml − 1 (i.e., fi ve times higher than the
typical 10 6 ml− 1 of most marine systems; see, for
example, Azam et al. 1983 ). Therefore, although they
can capture them, it is unlikely that tintinnids are
major consumers of bacteria in marine ecosystems;
this role is more likely attributed to heterotrophic
nanofl agellates (see Azam et al. 1 983 ; Fenchel 1987 ).
It must be noted though that size, measured as prey
radius or length, may be deceptive. Some diatoms (and
other prey) possess cellular extensions; specifi cally
Fig. 4.4 A summary of tintinnid functional responses.
diatoms, such as Thalassiosira , have β - chitin threads
Curves are only drawn over ranges where ingestion
that may be missed by casual observation or broken
increased with increasing prey abundance. See Table 4.2 for
parameters and literature associated with individual off by agitation in cultures. These structures inhibit
responses. grazing by tintinnids (Verity & Villareal 1 986) , and as
Fig. 4.5 Scaling tintinnid grazing rate with lorica oral diameter (LOD). (a) Maximum clearance rate versus LOD2 . (b) Data
from Dolan (2010) plus some additional data, indicating preferred prey diameter versus LOD . (c) Ingestion rate versus LOD2 .
Ingestion and clearance data are also presented in Table 4.1 . Equations on fi gures represent the line on the fi gure. R2 values
are offered to provide an indication of goodness of fi t.

98 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
will be seen below alter tintinnid swimming behavior is the case. Several organisms that are of an appropri-
and growth rate (Table 4.1 ). Thus, researchers must ate size are rejected (Taniguchi & Takeda 1988 ) and
be rigorous when estimating the perceived size of prey; even cause mortality (Table 4.1 ), whereas others are
this is a lesson clearly illustrated by tintinnids that selected for. Tintinnopsis sp. exhibited prey preference
should apply to work on all microzooplankton, if not on similarly sized prey, but this preference was not
all size selective grazers. accounted for by the trophic position of the prey
Still, there may be some general rules regarding prey (autotrophic versus heterotrophic), the diet of the
size of tintinnids; Kamiyama & Arima (2001) provide heterotrophs, or the gross biochemical composition of
an elegant exploration of such a trend. They argue that the prey (Verity 1991a ); instead it was speculated
ingestion by ciliates, and specifi cally tintinnids, can that other factors such as chemoreception play an
be described as the number of prey encountering the important role. Similarly, F avella sp. exhibits prey selec-
oral area (e.g., as illustrated in Fig. 4.2 ). Assuming this tivity on similarly sized living and inert prey (Stoecker
is so, ingestion rate (I ) of small prey can be expressed 1988 ). In fact, tintinnid feeding selectivity can be
as the ratio of total - prey cross - section ( A ) occupying extended to strains of a single taxon: E utintintinnis sp.
p
the ciliate ’ s oral area ( A ), over a short time period. exhibits selectivity on strains of Synechococcus that are
c
Thus, I = A / A , or scaling for prey diameter ( D ), of similar size, elemental composition, and motility;
p c
I = α D2 , where α is a constant associated with the tin- in this case, again, chemical cues were likely at play
tinnid ’ s affi nity to the prey, and thus D 2 = I / α . Prey (Apple et al. 2 011 ).
volume can be expressed in terms of the prey diameter: Surprisingly though, several tintinnids consume
D3 = V / β , where β = 1/6π . From here, they obtain taxa that are considered harmful or toxic: Favella ehren-
lnI = − 2/3 ln V + (ln α + 2/3 ln β ), suggesting that the bergii ingests the toxic species A lexandrium ostenfeldii
slope of ln I versus ln V will be − 2/3 ( − 0.67) and that (Hansen et al. 1992 ); Amphorides quadrilineata ingests
they - intercept provides information on the tintinnid ’ s the brown tide algal Aureoumbra lagunesis (Jakobsen
ability to capture prey. Kamiyama & Arima (2001) et al. 2001 ); Favella taraikaenis consumes the harmful
then explore this theoretical value by comparing it algae Heterocapsa circularisquama (Kamiyama 2000 )
to laboratory data on Favella taraikaensis ( − 0.63) and and Alexandrium tamarense (Kamiyama et al. 2 005) ;
Favella ehrenbergii ( − 0.51), indicating that the relation- andFavella sp. ingests H eterosigma akashiwo and grows
ship seems plausible. when this toxic species occurs in mixed cultures but
How then do these data on the potential size spec- dies when it is the sole diet (Graham & Strom 2010 ).
trum inform us about the average tintinnid? The modal In fact, when Favella taraikaenis consumes Alexandrium
oral diameter of tintinnids is approximately 40 μ m tamerense it excretes toxins that are then dissolved in
(sample size ∼ 650, range 5 – 185 μ m; Dolan 2010 ), and the environment, potentially reducing the toxicity of
tintinnids typically consume prey that are 8 μ m (Dolan the algal bloom (Kamiyama & Suzuki 2006 ). Still, it
2010 ). This falls within the range suggested by others is diffi cult to generalize feeding on toxic (or harmful)
of 2 – 30 μ m (Rassoulzadegan et al. 1988 ). Given that algal species by tintinnids; the relationship may be
modal tintinnid lorica length is approximately 60 μ m, population - specifi c and be infl uenced by previously
and the predicted predator: prey ratio for planktonic exposure to taxa, as has been observed in the rela-
ciliates is 8:1 (Hansen et al. 1994 ), based on prey size tionships between the copepod Acartia and A lexan-
alone, tintinnids seem to be good models of planktonic drium fundyense (Colin & Dam 2003 ). Possibly, Favella
ciliates. However, size is far from the only character taraikaensis that has been exposed to Alexandrium tama-
governing capture. rense may too have developed an ability to actively
feed on this toxic dinofl agellate (T. Kamiyama, personal
communication).
Selectivity other than size Even though tintinnids may consume harmful algae,
this can lead ultimately to their death (Stoecker et al.
Given that many planktonic taxa in the size range of 2002 ), so we must not equate grazing with growth.
prey available to tintinnids are toxic to a range of Furthermore, my own observations on non - tintinnid
organisms, it is na ï ve to think this would not also apply oligotrichs indicates that although one ciliate con-
to tintinnids, and it would be expected that there are sumes and grows well on a particular prey species, it
prey preference, even for non - toxic prey. Of course, this may not grow well on another species that is a perfectly

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 99
suitable food for a different species of ciliate. Although of ciliate biology (if not, see Lynn 2008 ; Hausmann et
tintinnids such asFavella may exhibit prey preference al. 2003 ; Hausmann & Bradbury 1996 ). The c ell - cycle
(see, for example, Stoecker et al. 1981 ), to my knowl- includes the process of individual cell growth, mitosis
edge this aspect of prey - specifi city being dependent on (of the micronucleus), amitotic division of the macro-
which tintinnid is examined has not been quantita- nucleus, formation of a new oral region, proliferation
tively demonstrated for tintinnids or other oligotrichs. of somatic cilia, and subsequent cell division; repeated
Clearly, understanding the impact of predator – prey cell divisions lead to exponential population growth
specifi cities will enhance our appreciation of both (for details on the division of tintinnids and the for-
dynamics and diversity in pelagic ecosystems and, mation of a new lorica and fate of the old lorica see
therefore, should be encouraged. Given the extensive Chapter 2 ).
wealth of information on tintinnids, it seems that they During repeated cell divisions (cell cycle, the left side
may be ideal candidates to pursue such studies. of Fig. 4.6 a), amitotic division of the macronucleus
may lead to loss or dilution of essential gene fragments,
and the accumulation of deleterious mutations (known
4.3 GROWTH as “ Muller ’ s ratchet ” (Bell 1988 )), which may ulti-
mately lead to senescence (inability to conjugate) and
An overview of tintinnid growth death of a clone, owing to lack of vitality (Fig. 4.6 ).
Given that the macronucleus governs cell growth, this
Before assessing the factors that govern tintinnid may reduce clonal fi tness (i.e., the progeny of a single
growth and reproduction, I offer an overview of a gen- cell); the solution to this decline in fi tness is sex (con-
eralized tintinnid c ell - and l ife - cycle (Fig. 4.6 ), with the jugation), which, among other processes, replaces
assumption that the reader is familiar with the basics the macronucleus (Fig. 4.6 ; see Lynn (2008) , or for a
Fig. 4.6 A generalized tintinnid life and cell cycle. (a) This is a schematized version of the process amalgamated from several
studies; it should not be seen as an accurate representation of any one species. Note also that it is unclear if encystment is the
result of cells in the cell cycle or if it is a post - conjugation event. (b) This is a representation of the nuclear events during and
after conjugation. It is based on observations of the non - tintinnid oligotrich P elagostrobilidium (Ota & Taniguchi 2003 ) and is,
therefore, only a prediction of what may occur in tintinnids. × , degeneration of a micronuclear product. The dashed
horizontal line is the predicted time when the two conjugating cells separate.

100 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
detailed evaluation of clonal decline see Bell (1988) ). pre - conjugation, when cells actively search for each
In fact, Gold (1971) and Gold & Pollinger (1971) attrib- other and then contact at the oral region (this period
uted the long- term (over a year) vitality of cultures of lasts∼ 5 min); formation of a cytoplasmic bridge at the
Tintinnopsis beroidea to the mixing of several isolates anterior end, meiosis of the micronuclei, and exchange
(potentially different mating types); in cultures Gold of gametic nuclei (lasting hours); and fi nally separa-
regularly observed conjugation, or at least behavioral tion. During conjugation the cells remain motile,
events that he attributed to conjugation. This ability of although the adoral membranelles may beat more
cultures to be rejuvenated through sex is also illus- slowly, and cells do not feed. This summary of the
trated by work on a close relative of tintinnids, Strom- three steps is a highly abridged version of the detailed
bidinopsis , that revealed conjugation within a single description provided by Laval - Peuto (1983) and is sup-
clone (selfi ng) resulting in rejuvenation of the culture ported by observations of Ota & Taniguchi (2003) on
(Montagnes et al. 1996 ). Possibly tintinnids too can Pelagostrobilidium and other older observations that
“ self ” , but this has not been observed. are picturesque but at times diffi cult to follow (e.g.,
The life - cycle (the right side of Fig. 4.6 a) may include Laackmann 1908 ).
multiple cell divisions, but it begins with conjugation. The nuclear reorganization in conjugating tintin-
During conjugation the micronuclei undergo meiosis nids is poorly documented, although Laackmann
to form gametic, haploid nuclei, one of which migrates (1908) describes and illustrates some of it in detail for
to the adjacent cell and fuses with its complementary, Tintinnopsis , but we can predict the sequence of events
stationary, haploid nucleus; after genetic recombina- from detailed observations on the closely related Pela-
tion, the old macronuclei disintegrate and are replaced gostrobilidium (Ota & Taniguchi 2003 ; Fig. 4.6 b); these
by newly generated macronuclei, produced by one of generally agree with the events that occur for the less
the newly formed micronuclei (Fig. 4.6 a, b); the details closely related oligotrich H alteria grandinella (Agatha &
of this process differ between ciliate taxa, and the inter- Foissner 2009 ), but there is some variation between
ested reader is directed to Lynn (2008) , Hausmann & observations as would undoubtedly occur between
Bradbury ( 1996) , and Chapter 3 . tintinnid species. For instance, Laackmann (1908) ,
There are few recent data on the life and cell cycle among other subtle differences from the process illus-
of tintinnids, likely because such fundamental re- trated in Fig. 4.6 b, suggests that for some tintinnids
search is time- consuming, requires culturing skills, two haploid micronuclei migrate to the partner. Finally,
and is perhaps more descriptive than hypothesis - there is one, atypical, report on tintinnid conjuga-
driven and thus is perceived as both costly and unim- tion that included “ microgametes ” (Gold & Pollingher
portant under the present management of science. 1971 ), but as this behavior has only been observed
However, thanks to the efforts of a few dedicated once it must be viewed with caution (see Chapter 6 ,
modern studies and several older works, it is possible where it may be suggested that these microgametes are
to assemble a general tintinnid life and cell cycle in fact parasites).
(Fig. 4.6 a, b). This amalgamation is conjectural, and Several tintinnid species produce cysts (Biernacka
is based primarily on observations of Favella (Laval - 1952 ; Paranjape 1980 ; Stoecker et al. 1983 ; Kami-
Peuto 1983; Stoecker et al. 1983 ) and is augmented yama 1994a, 1997a ; Kamiyama et al. 1995) ; see
by observation on a range of other tintinnids (Apstein Chapter 7 for details on encystment and excystement.
1893 ; Laackmann 1908 and references therein; It is unclear which factors stimulate cyst production,
Biernacka 1952 ; Coats & Heinbokel 1982 ) and recent although Paranjape (1980) argued that it was sea-
work on the near relatives of tintinnids (P elagostrobi- sonal in temperate waters, possibly with cysts acting as
lidium , Ota & Taniguchi 2003 ; Halteria grandinella , an overwintering stage, and it is unclear if cysts are a
Agatha & Foissner 2009 ). post - conjugation product or occur throughout the cell
The factors that stimulate tintinnid conjugation are cycle (Chapter 7) . Excystment, in contrast, has been
unknown, but, as for other ciliates, conjugation likely well investigated: it occurs when cysts are exposed to
arises in mature cells that are stimulated by changes warmer temperatures, increased light levels, and when
in environmental conditions such as temperature exposed to phytoplankton or their exudates (Paranjape
shifts and reduced prey abundance (but see Haus- 1980 ; Kamiyama 1994a, 1997a ; Kamiyama et al.
mann & Bradbury 1996 ; Lynn 2008 ). In Favella , 1995 ). Likely all of these factors relate to improved
conjugation has been divided into three phases: conditions in the spring, leading credence to Paran-

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 101
jape ’ s (1980) argument that cysts act as an overwin-
tering stage. More detailed work on related species of
oligotrichs supports this seasonal relevance (Kim &
Taniguchi 1997 ), although some encystment events
of naked oligotrichs (see, for example, Reid 1987 ;
M ü ller 1996 ) may follow short- t erm blooms; thus tin-
tinnids may form cysts in response to both short - and
long - term pressures to survive poor biotic and abiotic
conditions (again, Chapter 7 deals with this in more
detail).
Population growth
Fig. 4.7 An example of tintinnid population growth over
As indicated above, individual tintinnids will increase time, illustrating initial exponential growth, a carrying
in size, over the cell cycle (Fig. 4.6 a). However, gener- capacity, and decline in late stationary phase. Data from
•
ally when growth is referred to in the literature, it is Taniguchi & Kawakami (1983) : , Eutintinnus lususundae ;
synonymous with specifi c growth rate , the instantane- (cid:2) , Favella taraikaensis.
ous rate of increase (the novice reader is referred to any
general book on population biology for a more detailed
description); this constant is then used to determine tintinnids may either reach a maximum sustainable
population growth (see section “ I ncorporation of tintin- number (i.e., a carrying capacity), as was the case for
nids into models” on page 118 ). In laboratory cultures, Eutintinnus lususundae, or they may decline after a
specifi c growth rate (denoted by convection as r or μ , maximum is obtained, as was the case for Favella
with dimensions of time− 1 ) is typically determined, fol- taraikaensis ; these data illustrate that some caution
lowing standard population - biology methods, from the must be applied when choosing time points to estimate
change in the natural logarithm of numbers over time growth rate. Generally, fi eld populations rarely reach
(t ), but older studies on tintinnids may use log or log , more than 10 individuals per milliliter (Chapter 9 ), and
2 10
whereas others report doubling time, all of which are this may be a good rule of thumb to use when examin-
interconvertible. ing maximum numbers in cultures. Although, some
In actively growing cultures, measurements of tintinnids reach far higher numbers in culture; e.g., by
abundance (or biomass) can be made over several time increasing the prey abundance, Gold (1971) was able
points, and linear regression analysis may then be to raise Tintinnopsis beroidea to more than 103 cells
applied to the change in the natural logarithm of per milliliter. Such data suggest that tintinnids may be
numbers (or biomass) over time; this can be reduced “ bottom - up controlled ” under natural conditions (i.e.,
to two points: the initial (N ) and fi nal count ( N ) can their abundance is limited by prey resources rather
0 t
then be used to determine growth rate following: r = than grazing, but see Chapter 5 ).
ln (N / N )/ t . As we shall see below, however, using
0 t
numbers (or biomass as a bulk measure) alone, rather
than examining individual cell biomass, may be mis- Numerical response
leading, if estimating biomass production is the goal,
as cell size can change over time or under different prey The tintinnid numerical response (i.e., the change
regimes; i.e., a large ciliate with the same specifi c in specifi c growth rate, r , with prey abundance or
growth rate (determined by biomass or numbers) as a biomass) is possibly as important as the functional
small ciliate will produce more biomass over the same response (see section “ Functional response ” on page
time period. Furthermore, although growth rate esti- 93 ). Like the functional response, it tends to follow a
mates always assume exponential growth, it is clear rectangular hyperbolic (type II - like) shape, at times
that this cannot be maintained indefi nitely. As an with inhibition at high prey abundance. The typical
example, data on a constantly fed natural assemblage function that is fi t to such data differs from Equation
of ciliates, including tintinnids (Fig. 4.7 ) revealed that 4.2 only in that it has a non - zero prey - intercept

102 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 4.8 The numerical response. Specifi c growth rate Fig. 4.9 An indication of the diversity of tintinnid
increases to the asymptote r max in the typical response (solid numerical responses. Curves are only drawn over ranges
line), with the response passing through the x - axis at a level where ingestion increased with increasing prey abundance.
above zero ( P ′ ). However, behavioral changes (see text) with See Table 4.3 for parameters and literature associated with
prey abundance may “ inhibit ” growth. individual responses.
(Fig. 4.8 ) that represents the prey abundance required concentration (i.e., the level required to sustain tintin-
to maintain tintinnids at zero growth (Equation 4.3 ), nids) ranges from virtually 0 to 50 ng C ml − 1 and is typi-
cally between 10 and 20 ng C ml − 1 ; this range is on
r (P−P′) the low end of estimates found for naked oligotrichs
r= max (4.3)
k+P−P′ (reviewed by Gismervik 2005 ) and may imply a selec-
tive advantage for tintinnids at low prey abundances.
with, r being the maximum growth rate, P being Second, many of the growth rates reach a maximum
max
prey abundance, P ′ being the prey “ threshold level ” at approximately 1 d − 1 (i.e., ∼ 1.5 divisions d − 1 ), and
where r = 0, and k being a constant (note, k is not the generally by 50 ng C ml − 1 most species have achieved
half - saturation constant as in the functional response their maximum growth rate; this is in the same range
k ; k − P ′ is homologous to a half - saturation constant; as other oligotrichs (see, for example, Gismervik 2005 ).
½
see Fenton et al. (2010) ). The ecological implications of the above fi ndings
This function (Equation 4 .3 ) has been widely applied have been discussed in terms of the naked planktonic
to tintinnid numerical responses for over 30 years (e.g., ciliates (Montagnes 1996 ): prey (2 – 20 μ m) biomass
Heinbokel 1978a ), and is extremely useful as it reveals levels in many coastal waters range between 5 and
mortality rates at sub - threshold levels, and coupled 50 ng C ml − 1 . Although this suggests that at times there
with the functional response may reveal other at- are insuffi cient prey available to support tintinnid
tributes (see section “ Gross growth and assimilation growth, it also suggests that tintinnids are capable of
effi ciency ” on page 105 and Box 4.2 ). Again, as for the achieving their maximum growth rates at (and above)
functional responses, I have focused on laboratory stud- the higher end of typical prey levels; i.e. most, but not
ies of the numerical responses and have converted prey all, of the time tintinnids are bottom - up controlled,
to carbon for constancy (Fig. 4.9 and Table 4.3 ). These being limited by prey availability (but see Chapter 5 ).
growth incubation experiments typically assume expo- Furthermore, tintinnids will have maximum grow
nential growth is constant over a short incubation pe- rates equal to or greater than their prey (see Banse
riod in vessels on the order of 10 – 1000 ml, and determine 1982 ; Montagnes 1996 ). Consequently, at times,
r , as described in “ Population growth ” on page 101 . when prey blooms occur, tintinnids may exploit them,
Besides the obvious variation in growth responses and then die due to starvation as prey are driven
(Fig. 4.9 ), likely because of different predator and prey to extinction. Tintinnids will also have a selective ad-
species, notable similarities exist. First, the threshold vantage over competing mesozooplankton grazers

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 103
Table 4.3 Parameters associated with the growth of tintinnids. Values for r , k , and P ′ are described in the text. Data for
max
responses were either obtained directly from the literature or were estimated from data derived from fi gures presented in the
literature (i.e., curves were fi t through the obtained data to determine parameters). All values were rounded to two signifi cant
fi gures. Note also that responses are not temperature corrected, and experimental temperatures are presented. The observed
maximum growth rate is presented when growth inhibition occurred at high prey levels and was obtained visually for fi gures.
Note, when the response does not reach an asymptote (e.g., some of the highest response in Fig. 4.9 ), then r is not
max
necessarily the maximum obtained growth rate; it is a predicted maximum at an unrealistically high prey concentration
and must not be seen as a real maximum. All P ′ and k values are presented in terms of carbon, which were converted from
prey volume when necessary, by either using estimates provided within the text of the relevant papers or converted using
predictions of Menden - Deuer & Lessard (2000) . References (Ref) : (1) Hansen 1995 ; (2) Heinbokel 1978a ; (3) Jakobsen
et al. 2001; (4) Kamiyama et al. 2005 ; (5) Rosetta & McManus 2003 ; (6) Stoecker et al. 1983 ; (7) Verity 1985 ; (8) Verity
1991 .
Ciliate Prey Prey Prey r Observed k (ng P´ (ng °C Ref
max
length biomass (d−1) maximum, Cml−1) Cml−1)
(μm) (pgC) r (d −1)
max
Amphorides Isochrysis 5 6.8 0.38 0.36 27 24 21 (3)
quadrilineata galbana
Eutintinnus Isochrysis 5 – 1.5 1.3 24 14 18 (2)
pectinis galbana
Favella Heterocapsa 20 510 0.77 0.72 60 5.1 15 (1)
ehrenbergii triqetra
Favella Prymnesium 10 45 0.51 0.45 54 43 20 (5)
ehrenbergii parvum
Favella sp. mixed diet – – 1.4 1.1 130 8.8 17 (6)
Favella sp. Heterocapsa 20 510 0.85 0.84 9.6 0 15 (6)
triqetra
Favella Alexandrium 30 590 1.0 0.99 3.1 1.3 15 (4)
tamarense tamerense
Helicostomella Isochrysis 5, 5, 8 – 0.76 0.74 9.6 7.5 18 (2)
subulata galbana,
Monochrysis
lutheri,
Dunaliella
tertiolecta
Metacylis Prymnesium 5 45 0.45 0.43 26 5.6 20 (5)
angulata parvum
Tintinnopsis Isochrysis 5 – 1.4 1.4 12 0 18 (2)
acuminata galbana,
Monochrysis
lutheri
Tintinnopsis Isochrysis 5 3.4 1.8 39 11 20 (7)
acuminate galbana
Tintinnopsis Katodinium 7 41 1.2 0.97 77 17 20 (8)
dadayi rotundatum
plus other
prey
Tintinnopsis Dicrateria 5 11 1.0 0.92 26 22 15 (8)
vasculum inornata

104 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
(Chapter 9 ), as their growth rates are higher. There Scaling tintinnid maximum growth rate
are instances of such tintinnid - blooms occurring: for to size
example, Admiraal & Venekamp (1986) observed tin-
tinnid blooms associated with an algal bloom of P haeo- Several studies have explored and then used the strong
cystis pouchetii and suggested tintinnid grazing pressure inverse relationship between plankter size and growth
was in part responsible for the demise of the algal rate (e.g., Hansen et al. 1997 ; Glazier 2006 ). These
bloom; similarly Andersen & S ø renson (1986) argued functions have both pragmatic application in size -
that blooms of H elicostomella subulata might control structured analysis of food - web dynamics (e.g., Mon-
prey populations over short periods in a Danish fjord. tagnes et al. 2010 ) and more theoretical applications,
It might also be expected that tintinnids move such as in the assessment of metabolic scaling (e.g.,
between local patches of prey and can bloom under Glazier 2006 ). Tintinnids, because of their loricae, are
conditions where prey are abundant. Such specula- relatively diffi cult to place into this context, as most
tions were made by Stoecker et al. ( 1984) who found a studies consider body (or cell) size as the independent
correlation between the abundance of Favella and its variable; the lorica obscures the cell, preventing accu-
prey, and this supports other work that indicates that rate measurement. It is, therefore, not surprising that
naked oligotrichs may bloom when prey are abundant work on tintinnids has focuses on the relationship
and graze down their prey (see, for example, Mon- between lorica size and growth rate; Dolan (2010)
tagnes & Lessard 1 999 ). Of course, this idea is not new; indicated that the lorical oral diameter (LOD) was a
it was posed by Banse (1982) who argued such boom – good metric for predicting growth rate, and here I build
bust dynamics should occur as ciliates have equally on his data set (provided online by Dolan (2010) ) and
high, or higher, growth rates as their prey. In Section explore the use of this response (Fig. 4.10 ).
4.4 , we will see that tintinnids may have an ability to There is a weak but signifi cant relationship between
fi nd and remain in regions of high prey abundance and specifi c growth rate ( r ) and LOD, indicating that LOD
thus increase their growth rate. could be used as a predictor. Furthermore, the allom-
Fig. 4.10 (a) The relationship between specifi c ( r , d− 1 ) growth rate and LOD. (b) The allometric relationship between logr and
logLOD3 (the latter acting as a proxy for volume). Data are from Dolan (2010) , augmented by data from Hansen (1995) ,
Heinbokel (1978a) , Jakobsen et al. (2001) , Kamiyama et al. (2006) , Rosetta & McManus (2003) , and Verity (1991a, 1985) .

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 105
etric relationship of log r versus logLOD3 (the latter
acting as a proxy for volume) has a slope of approxi-
mately −0 .13, which is less than the typically predicted
−0 .25, based on energetic arguments (see Hansen
et al. 1 997; Glazier 2 006) . However, the data presented
in Fig. 4 .10 are neither temperature corrected nor are
they based solely on maximum growth rates. Both of
these concerns must be addressed if this relationship
for tintinnids is to be pursued, and likely this will
require increasing the data set.
Cell size, number, and growth ra te
As indicated above, most tintinnid growth rate esti- Fig. 4.11 An indication of how tintinnid biovolume may
mates rely on a change in numbers, and from a change with increasing prey abundance. Data obtained from
perspective of population dynamics, this is entirely Kamiyama et al. (2005) . The line through the fi t is a
appropriate, especially as it is individuals that feed, phenomenological response, following the equation depicted
conjugate, and disperse. However, biomass- or on the fi gure, where V is cell volume, P is prey abundance,
bioenergetic- b ased models often work with bulk esti- andα , β , and ε are constants (see Box 4.2 for details on this
response).
mates (e.g., carbon, see section “ Incorporation of tin-
tinnids into models” on p age 1 18) . If cell biomass (or
its surrogate biovolume; see Menden - Deuer & Lessard
2000 ) remains constant, then the product of tintinnid on page 118 ) or to estimates ingestion when growth
abundance and an average cell biomass can be used in is known (Straile 1997 ); consequently they require
such models, and this approach has been used in the careful consideration.
past. However, there is good evidence that cell volume Given the variety of diets that are available to tintin-
of tintinnids (and closely related ciliates to tintinnids) nids and the range of preferences for these (Table 4.1 ),
changes with prey abundance (e.g., Fig. 4.11 ; Mon- it should not be surprising that GGE and AE should
tagnes & Lessard 1999 ). Therefore, applying an average both be species dependent. In fact, growth may not just
biomass to refl ect the numerical response in terms of depend on prey species but also on prey clones (Table
biomass is inappropriate. Instead, as factors such as 4.1 , Hansen 1989) . Furthermore, there is a substan-
prey abundance (Fig. 4 .11) , temperature (Atkinson tial amount of literature that indicates that effi ciency
et al. 2 003) , and culture age (personal observations) depends very much on the prey size, composition, and
may infl uence cell size of ciliates, such biotic and palatability (e.g., Ki ø rboe 2008 ). To my knowledge, the
abiotic interactions must be considered. infl uence of these factors have not been explored for
GGE or AE of tintinnids.
O f the two, GGE is the easier to estimate, by dividing
Gross growth and assimilation ef fi ciency specifi c ingestion rate (I /predator biomass) by specifi c
growth rate ( r) ; this is equivalent to dividing the
Gross growth effi ciency (GGE, sometimes referred to as biomass ingested over a set period by the biomass
yield or gross production effi ciency) is the amount of incorporated into new cells over the same period.
ingested prey biomass that is incorporated into preda- However, there are issues with the application of GGE.
tor biomass, whereas assimilation effi ciency (AE or First, as tintinnid biomass may vary with prey abun-
e , see Box 4.2 ) is the amount of prey biomass that is dance (see section “ Cell size, number, and growth rate ”
assimilated (i.e., not egested) by the predator. One or on page 105 ), a constant predator biomass may be
the other of these parameters is often incorporated inappropriate to apply in calculations, as several
into population and ecosystem models to estimate the authors have done in the past for tintinnids (see, for
numerical response from functional response data example, Verity 1 985, 1991a) . Second, as the numeri-
(see section “ Incorporation of tintinnids into models” cal response (Equation 4 .3) has a positive x - intercept,

106 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
whereas the functional response (Equation 4.2 ) passes
through the origin, GGE will approach zero at the
threshold prey level (P ′ , Equation 4.3 ) and will be nega-
tive below it; thus GGE cannot be constant, and calcu-
lations may result in, non -i ntuitive, negative values
where predator mortality occurs. Finally, as the func-
tional and numerical responses often do not have
similar shapes (i.e., the asymptotic response differs,
with ingestion tending to increase when growth rate
has reach a maximum, see Box 4.2 for an example),
as prey abundance changes so does GGE, typically
decreasing with increasing prey (Straile 1997 ). Conse-
quently, determining and applying a single mean GGE
value in model calculations, as is often done, can be
misleading. Fig. 4.12 Some examples of how GGE may vary with prey
As suggested above, GGE of tintinnids appears to abundance. D •ata from Kamiyama (2005) on F avella
taraikaensis ( ) at 15 ° C, Verity (1985) on T intinopsis
change with prey abundance. For instance, the data
acuminata ( (cid:3) ) and T intinopsis vasculum ((cid:4) ) at 15 ° C, and
presented in Fig. 4.12 suggest some variation with prey,
Verity (1991a) on T intinnopsis dadayi ( (cid:5) ) at 20 ° C.
and for Favella sp. Stoecker & Evans (1985) indicate
a reduction from 0.5 to 0.25 as prey levels increased
from approximately 20 – 100 to 350 – 400 ng C ml− l .
Generally, tintinnid GGE seems to range between 0.3 prey abundance; this follows the trend support by
and 0.7, with a mean of approximately 0.45, when it Fenton et al. (2010) that AE generally varies with prey
is measured above the prey threshold level (Equation abundance. So far, there has been no application of the
4.3 , P′ ). This is above the average value determined biomass - based methods offered by Fenton et al. (2010)
for ciliates (0.3) and other planktonic protozoa and to tintinnid data. Here I use one set of data to illustrate
animals (0.3 or below), in general (Straile 1997 ). the method ’ s potential use and issues arising from
However, these observations (Fig. 4.12 ) might be problematic data (Box 4.2 ); the example should stimu-
regarded with caution when applying them to tintin- late more rigorous research in this area rather than
nids, given that they are based on only four studies, by discouraging the reader.
three separate research groups, on four species (three
of which are in the same genus). Furthermore, as we
will see in Section 4.5 and as Verity (1985) indicates, 4.4 SWIMMING BEHAVIOR
temperature will alter GGE of tintinnids.
Assimilation effi ciency is pragmatically and compu- The basics of swimming
tationally more challenging to study on protozoa, as it
either requires measuring egestion rate (i.e., the pro- Before describing tintinnid swimming, we need to con-
duction of fecal material), respiration rate (e.g. oxygen textualize briefl y the environment in which they live.
uptake; for tintinnids see Verity (1985) ), or relying on Others have done a more thorough job than I, and
biomass based functional and numerical responses the interested reader is directed to Vogel (1996) for
and a rather complex set of calculations (Fenton et al. an overview, to Purcell (1977) for microorganisms
2010 ; Box 4.2 ). Still, there are some estimates of in general, to Ki ø rboe (2008) for plankton, and to
tintinnid assimilation effi ciency, under single prey Fenchel (1987) for protozoa specifi cally. However, to
abundances: 71% for Favella sp. and 67% for Favella summarize these works briefl y, tintinnids live in an
ehrenbergii (Stoecker 1984 ; Rassoulzadegan 1978 , environment of low Reynolds numbers, one where
respectively). water does not act as we know it. For tintinnids, water
However, like GGE, AE should vary with prey abun- is sticky and viscous, akin to us swimming through
dance. Fenton et al. (2010) , reanalyzing the data of glycerol or syrup. There are also virtually no inertial
Kamiyama et al. (2005) , indicate that at least for forces; when a tintinnid stops propelling itself, it stops
Favella taraikaensis , assimilation effi ciency varies with moving, and there will be a portion of the water that

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 107
Box 4.2 Assessing assimilation effi ciency
It is pragmatically diffi cult to determine assimilation However, Equation B4.3 assumes that predator
effi ciency (e ) by measuring protozoan, and for our pur- biomass is constant, with respect to prey abundance,
poses tintinnid, egestion rate, as collecting protozoan and as we have seen (section “ Cell size, number, and
fecal pellets is challenging, although possible (Stoecker growth rate” on p age 1 05 ), this is undoubtedly not so
1984 ). Instead, we can adopt a different method to (e.g., Figs 4 .11 and B 4.2 c). Consequently, Fenton et al.
assess how e varies with prey abundance. Fenton et al. (2010) modifi ed their analysis to account for changes
(2010) prove that e can be determined from biomass- in predator ingestion rate, growth rate, and biomass
based functional and numerical responses (Equations with prey abundance. Here I use literature data on
4.2 and 4 .3 , respectively) and derive Equation B4.3, Favella taraikaensis (from Kamiyama et al. 2 005 ) to illus-
with parameters as defi ned in the main text. trate: 1) how this numerical procedure might be applied
and 2) some concerns regarding the analysis of data
by this procedure.
e= kr max(k 1/2+P) ( B4.3) The data of Kamiyama et al. (2005) provide Fig.
I (k−P′)(k−P−P′) B4.2 a – c, with the associated equations. Using the
max
Fig. B4.2 Reponses used to determine the relationship between assimilation effi ciency ( e ) and prey abundance: the
functional response (a); the numerical response (b); the volume response to prey abundance (c). The response of
assimilation effi ciency to prey abundance (d) was obtained from Equation B4.3 and procedures described in this box.
Data are from Kamiyama et al. (2005) ; equations in panels a and b are parameterized from values presented in the
source, whereas parameters in the equation in panel c are derived from fi tting the phenomenological equation to data
presented in the source. The inset on d is the initial portion of the main response in this panel.
Continued

108 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
functional and numerical response parameters and by methodological issues here; it is possible that the one -
assuming a constant predator volume we can then day acclimation period, at each prey abundance,
determine how assimilation (e ) might vary with prey applied by Kamiyama et al. (2005) was insuffi ciently
abundance (Fig. B4.2d, dashed line). However, there long. For instance, if the tintinnid had a surplus of food
are issues with this response in that it indicatese>1 before acclimation, then growth rate at low prey levels
as prey abundance decreases (Fig.B4.2d, insert). We may have been higher than would be determined if
can then use the volume response to correct for the ciliate had been acclimated for several days at
changes in biomass with prey abundance by multiply- low prey levels. In fact, the very low threshold level
ing e (from Equation B4.3) by the ratio of predator of 1.3 ngCml−1 (see Table 4.3) suggests that this may
volume at a particular prey abundance (Fig. B4.2c) have been an issue. These data thus potentially reveal
and the maximum predator volume (obtained from an important issue. Acclimation time and carefully
Fig.B4.2c=2.84×104μm3). This provides a predator controlled experiments are essential if we plan to use
biomass-corrected estimate ofe (Fig. B4.2d, solid line). responses to model ecological and ecophysiological
Although this conversion solves one issue (e becomes processes.
<1), it still reveals a response that convention, and pos- Alternatively, the unexpectedly low estimate ofe may
sibly logic, would question: it is unlikely that e<0.05 result from the choice of prey,Alexandrium tamarense,
over much of the observed range. which is relatively large for tintinnid food and is toxic.
The underlying reasons for this unlikely result are Such factors may impose energetic costs on the preda-
unclear, but they undoubtedly result from a mismatch tor (T. Kamiyama, personal communication) and could
between the functional and numerical responses. As result in both a slower digestion time and a reduced
can be seen in Fig. B4.2b, growth rate reaches an cell size of the tintinnid at high prey abundances.
asymptote far earlier than ingestion. There may be Clearly, these factors too must be considered.
is effectively defl ected away from the fl ow, as illus- relatively, they can be more susceptible to predators
trated (Fig. 4.13 ) by Faur é - Fremiet (1908) . Finally, (Broglio et al. 2001 and Chapter 5 ). One wonders then
because water is effectively sticky around the ciliate, a why they have a lorica (but see Chapter 1 ).
tintinnid will move with a “ coat” of water around it, Swimming speeds of F avella range from 0.4 to
and the ciliate will rely on diffusion to attain signals. 1.2 mm s − 1 , and the only study on another tintinnid
Thus, unlike many invertebrates that passively fi lter - (Metacylis , Broglio et al. 2001 ) supports this general
feed allowing water to fl ow to them (e.g., feather speed (0.8 mm s− 1 ). This is similar to rates of up to
worms), tintinnids must constantly move themselves about 1 mm s− 1 for the aloricate oligotrich S trombidium
or the water around them to obtain food. As indicated sulcatum (Fenchel & Jonsson 1988 ) but is faster than
above, for tintinnids, swimming and food acquisition that of S trobilidim spiralis , ( = Pelagostrobilidium spirale )
are inextricably linked. which moves on average approximately 0.3 mm s − 1 ,
Most of the study of swimming has focused on a punctuated by about six jumps per minute, which are
single genus: Favella (Taniguchi & Takeda 1988 , about 0.4 mm long at a speed of approximately 4 mm s− 1
Buskey & Stoecker 1988, 1989 , Hansen 1989 , Strom (Broglio et al. 2001 ). Apparently, from these limited
et al. 2007 , Harvey & Menden - Deuer 2011 ), so the data, tintinnids do not swim in exactly the same
following description relies heavily on these works. manner as their near relatives.
Typically, tintinnids swim in a helix (which may vary Besides speed, tintinnid turning behavior also varies,
in direction rotation, even for individuals: S. Strom, with reorientation, expressed in the literature as
personal communication, S. Menden - Deuer, personal degrees per second, ranging around 140 (Buskey &
communication) punctuated by turns, during which Stoecker 1988, 1989 ). Decreased swimming speed and
the ciliate swims backward for a short distance, and increased reorientation occur at higher food concen-
reorients itself (Fig. 4.14 ; Hansen 1989). Tintinnids tration, resulting in tintinnids remaining in a prey
do not “ jump” , as do some of their near relatives, the patch (Buskey & Stoecker 1988 ). Changes in swim-
naked oligotrichs (see, for example, Gilbert 1994 ; ming behavior (speed and number of turns) may also
Jakobsen 2001 ); possibly the lorica prevents this occur when prey produce toxins or have fi ne spines
movement, which in fact may be a disadvantage, as, that may physically disturb the ciliates (Fig. 4.14 ;

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 109
Hansen 1989 , Buskey & Stoecker 1988, 1989 ; Harvey
& Menden - Deuer 2011 ).
An a ssessment of s wimming m otion
Recognizing the general swimming behavior, I now
provide a speculative analysis of its underlying mecha-
nisms. This description is based primarily on the study
of the non - tintinnid oligotrich S trombidium sulcatum
(Fenchel & Jonsson 1988 ) and is augmented by work
on tintinnids. Fenchel & Jonnson (1988) proposed that
swimming is composed of two rotational motions:
movement of the ciliate in circles, caused by asymme-
try of the oral ciliature, and the rotation of the ciliate
around its long axis (Fig. 4 .15) . The transportation (or
displacement rate, v) of the ciliate is then defi ned by
Equation 4.4 ,
ωr
v= 0 /ω0
[ 1+(ω )2]0.5 (4.4)
0 1
where, ω is the rotational rate of the ciliate in a circle,
0
r is the radius of the circle when there is no displace-
0
ment, and ω is the rotation rate of the ciliate around
1
its long axis (Fig. 4.15 ). When ω is 0, the ciliate swims
1
in a circle, whereas as ω approaches infi nity the ciliate
0
Fig. 4.13 From Faur é - Fremiet (1908) . Water fl ow swims increasingly in a straight line. Thus, by altering
generated by Tintinnidium inquilinum ( Eutintinnus these two attributes, the ciliate may change its disper-
iniquilinus ). sal rate, without changing its speed and, therefore,
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 4.14 Swimming patterns of F avella , re drawn from (a) Hansen (1989) and (b, c) Buskey, E.J. & Stoecker, D.K. (1989)
Behavioral responses of the marine tintinnid Favella sp. to phytoplankton: infl uence of chemical, mechanical and photic
stimuli. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 132, 1 – 16, with permission from Elsevier. The two tracks on the
left of panel a illustrate Favella swimming in a relatively tight spiral and a spiral that appears almost to be a straight line; on
the right of panel a are two illustrations of the ciliate reversing in the presence of the toxic dinofl agellate A lexandrium
tamarense (the triangles represent periods of up to 1 s, when the ciliate was immobile). In panel b, F avella is swimming in the
presence of the prey species Heterocapsa triquetra , whereas in panel c it is swimming in the presence of T halassiosira sp. that
possesses chitinous threads, which inhibit swimming.

110 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 4.15 A proposed generalized tintinnid swimming pattern, based on the predicted behavior of S trombidium sulcatum by
Fenchel & Jonnson (1988) . Symbols in the spiral swimming diagram are as described in the text (Equation 4.4 ). Panels a and
b are the theoretical orientations of the oral membranelles when the cell is not rotating around its own axis (a) and when it is
(b). The dotted images are traces of swimming patterns for S trombidium sulcatum , indicating displacement while swimming in
a spiral, similar to that observed for tintinnids (Fig. 4.14 ).
not necessarily changing the processing of water or Fig. 4.6 , and is quite similar to the estimate of 38 μ l h− 1
feeding rate. that I have made, above, from data presented in Hansen
For both S . sulcatum (Fenchel & Jonnson 1988 ) and (1991) , but it is lower than the estimate of 131 μ l h− 1
Favella taraikaensis (Taniguchi & Takeda 1988 ) the made by Buskey & Stoecker (1988) . Possibly the
adoral membranelles beat in a metachronal fashion method of extrapolating the maximum rate made by
around the oral end with a frequency of approxi- Buskey & Stoecker (1988) overestimated this value, or
mately 10 – 30 Hz, although for tintinnids held in the oral encounter area of F avella is, in fact, larger than
place, a reduced rate occurs when less favored prey are I estimate (e.g., if the diameter was 150 μ m, maximum
present (Taniguchi & Takeda 1988 ), suggesting a clearance would be more than twice my calculation).
reduced swimming speed; through this process, water Still, this simple prediction suggests a means to sup-
is forced between the membranes (acting analogously port the trend illustrated in Fig. 4 .5, offers a further
to a peristaltic pump; see Fenchel (1987) for a review research avenue to pursue, and provides us with a
of this process), from the inner area (the oral region of mechanism that may apply to other planktonic ciliates.
the tintinnid) outward (Fig. 4.2 ). Fenchel & Jonsson Furthermore, if we could estimate the handling time
(1988) suggest an intriguing explanation: that by of a tintinnid (likely limited by the time to recycle food
changing the angle of the membranelles from a radial vacuole membrane, see above), then it might be pos-
arrangement to a more tangential angle (Fig. 4 .15 a, sible to discard the tedious process of estimating the
b), the ciliate will increase rotation around its own long functional response through measuring grazing rates
axis ( ω ) and thus change its trajectory following argu- across an extensive number of prey concentrations
1
ments made above (Equation 4 .4 ). and simply predict the functional response from maxi-
We can also make simple estimates of the maximum mum ingestion (I = 1/handling time) and maximum
max
clearance rate (see Box 4.1 ) from predictions of swim- clearance rate ( = I /k); see Box 4.1 .
max
ming speed and the size of the oral region: assuming
the oral region of Favella is approximately 100 μ m in
diameter, the oral area and thus the area of encounter Changes in swimming behavior
would be about 7900 μ m2 , and the volume encoun-
tered by a ciliate swimming 1000 μ m s− 1 would be Like many protozoa, tintinnids tend to accumulate in
approximately 30 μ l h− 1 . This is within the same range regions of high prey abundance, likely infl uenced by
as measurements of maximum clearance presented in chemical or physical cues produced by potential prey

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 111
(Buskey & Stocker 1988 , Verity 1988 ). The response to However, it is possible that planktonic ciliates reorient
accumulate is undoubtedly not through movement when they sink, so that their anterior faces upward
toward a recognized source (taxis), as their small size (Fenchel 1987 ). This appears to be the case for oligot-
and lack of appropriately spaced sensory structures richs in general and for tintinnids specifi cally; not sur-
will reduce the ability of tintinnids to perceive a gradi- prisingly, the mass of the lorica may aid in reorientation
ent. Instead, tintinnids will rely on kinesis, a combi- (Jonsson 1989 ). This advantage appears to be refl ected
nation of “ runs ” (spiral swimming) and “ tumbles ” in the distribution of tintinnid in fi eld samples, where
(reversal and reorientation) leading to the apparent they were more strongly associated with surface waters
recognition of a gradient. By modifying the length and than their “ naked ” close relatives (Jonsson 1989 ). Pos-
speed of the run and the frequency of tumbles, tintin- sibly a selective advantage of a lorica is that it aids in
nids will alter their dispersal and remain in favorable directional swimming (Kofoid & Campbell 1939 )?
conditions; for a detailed account of this process in
protozoa see Fenchel (1987) ; Fenchel & Blackburn
Swimming synthesis
(1999) ; Blackburn & Fenchel (1999) . Possibly, follow-
ing logic described above (Fig. 4.15 ), tintinnids could
refrain from tumbles and instead simply swim in circles Swimming behavior of tintinnids is evidently a complex
to reduce dispersal, and thus their options seem to be combination of responses to prey, chemical cues, and
greater than for some other protozoa. There is good gravity. These changes in behavior will have direct and
evidence that as conditions become favorable (increased indirect effects on their success. For instance, increased
prey), Favella exhibits increased turning behavior and swimming rate will increase contact with prey, and
reduced speed, and thus reduces its displacement upward migration may bring tintinnids into sunlit
(Buskey & Stoecker 1988 ). regions, where autotrophic prey are more abundant.
Reversal of swimming may also occur to avoid Ideally, such behaviors should be incorporated into
conditions, and using this behavior tintinnids have the assessment of their survival and their impact in
been used to assess the effect of toxic algae on proto- models (see section “ Incorporation of tintinnids into
zoa. When Favella ehrenbergii is exposed to the toxic models ” on page 118 ). However, given that most of the
dinofl agellate A lexandrium tamarense , it increased the research on swimming has focused on relatively few
number of “ tumbles” and the period of swimming of the myriad of tintinnid species, there is a need to
backward increased (Fig. 4.14 ; Hansen 1989 ); similar explore taxonomic variation in behaviors across this
behavior was observed for Favella taraikaensis exposed diverse group. In doing so, we may fi nd scalable traits,
to Heterocapsa circularisquama (Kamiyama & Arima such as the relationship between swimming speed and
1997 ). Fenchel (1987) refers to such behavior, a series organism size.
of quick reversals that does not persist but is followed
by resumed swimming, as transient. This behavior
4.5 RESPONSE TO ABIOTIC FACTORS AND
allows escape from an environment that has been
INTERACTIONS WITH BIOTIC FACTORS
entered, as if tumbles were to persist the protozoan
would remain in the source and never escape! Com-
So far in this chapter, the focus has been on how bio-
plementing this behavior, another kinetic response
logical factors, primarily prey abundance and type,
has evolved for some protists: long runs, once a non -
infl uence tintinnid behavior and ecophysiology. Now I
favorable environment is experienced; whether tintin-
turn to the few abiotic factors that have been investi-
nids exhibit this is unknown.
gated for tintinnids and suggest which others require
A fi nal directional swimming of tintinnids is nega-
attention. In doing so, I briefl y raise issues associated
tively geotactic in nature (i.e., they tend to swim
with interaction between abiotic and biotic factors, and
upward), which appears to be hydrodynamically
again suggest directions.
driven. Few ciliates possess any structure associated
with sensing gravity, although some species have
statocyst - like organelles and other use the entire cell Temperature
“ protoplast ” as a gravity sensor (Hemmersbach &
Braun 2006 ; Hemmersbach - Krause et al. 1994 ; As tintinnids are globally distributed from the poles
Hausmann et al. 2003 ; Hausmann & Bradbury 1996 ). to the equator (see Chapter 10 ), and local waters will

112 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
change in temperature seasonally and with depth, one Below a critical temperature reactions will slow to
of the most important abiotic infl uences on tintinnids the point where rates decrease rapidly, and above a
will be temperature. However, we must also recognize critical temperature reactions will be inhibited as pro-
that species (and possibly strains) undoubtedly are teins begin to deform and denature (Schmidt - Nielsen
adapted (i.e., evolved) to local environments, and 1990 ). Generally, however, it is appreciated that there
measurements from one region may not be applicable is a region where rates (e.g., growth, ingestion, swim-
to others. For instance, as will be seen below, Favella ming) increase with temperature (Fig. 4.16 a).
sp. obtained from temperate waters grows poorly at Stoecker & Guillard (1982) found no obvious effect
8 ° C, at not more than 0.2 d − 1 (Aelion & Chisholm of temperature (8, 15, and 20 ° C) on the ingestion rate
1985 ), whereas Tintinnopsis spp. and Parafavella gi- of Favella sp. In contrast, work on F avella sp. by Aelion
gantea , examined in polar waters, grow well at 5 ° C (1.7 & Chisholm (1985) both supports the trend that
and 0.38 d − 1 , respectively) (Hansen & Jensen 2000 ). growth and ingestion rates increase with tempera-
With this caveat in mind, how do we account for ture (Fig. 4.16 b, c) and unintentionally illustrates the
temperature changes? Based on theoretical and empir- inappropriateness of determining Q values from such
10
ical chemistry, rate reactions should increase expo- data, as there is no apparent exponential increase. Like
nentially with temperature, following the Arrhenius many other studies, these authors still considered esti-
function, which is similar, but not identical, to the Q mates of Q (an exponential function, Equation 4.5
10 10
function (see Schmidt - Nielsen 1990 ). As I will illus- and Fig. 4.16 a) between several temperatures (Aelion
trate below, there is good evidence that neither of these & Chisholm 1985 ); this illustrates a common problem:
exponential functions are very appropriate, but given we often, unquestioningly, accept well - established
that many studies on tintinnids (and other protozoa) approaches that are blatantly wrong. More recently,
rely on Q , a brief review of the concept is provided the acceptance of Q was taken to task, and it appears
10 10
below. that protozoan growth rate increases linearly over the
The historically used, biology - based temperature range where growth increases, with a slope of 0.07 ±
quotient is Q , the change in a rate over 10 ° C (Equa- 0.005 d − 1 ° C − 1 (Montagnes et al. 2003 ). Fitting a linear
10
tion 4.5 ), where R , and R are the rates at two tem- regression though the appropriate portion of data
1 2
peratures ( T and T , respectively). from Aelion & Chisholm (1985) provides a slope of
1 2
0.0563 d − 1 ° C − 1 (Fig. 4.16 b), well within the range
=⎛ ⎜R 2⎞ ⎟10/(T2−T1) observed by Montagnes et al. (2003) , but lower than
Q (4.5)
10 ⎝ R ⎠ the mean. It would be inappropriate to speculate that
1
Fig. 4.16 An indication of the infl uence of temperature on tintinnid growth and ingestion rates. (a) An indication of how
general rates are classically expected to increase with temperature, indicating that at high and low temperatures rates
decrease, and in a mid - phase (arrow) they increase exponentially, following Equation 4.5 . (b, c) The effect of temperature on
the growth and ingestion rates of F avella sp., based on data from Aelion & Chisholm (1985) . The line through the growth data
is the best linear fi t through the portion where there is an increase in growth rate with temperature (see the text for details on
this line).

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 113
this one species represents tintinnids. However, given Other abiotic factors
that neither the growth nor ingestion data are shown
to increase exponentially (Fig. 4.16 ), this seems to be p H
yet another area for tintinnid - based study, especially
The infl uence of several other abiotic factors on tintin-
as temperature corrections such as Q are regularly
10 nids has been explored, but not to the extent that has
applied both in meta - analyses (e.g., Hansen et al.
been placed on temperature. Twenty years ago we
1997 ) and in ecosystem models (e.g., Blackford et al.
would not have thought to consider the affect of pH
2004 ).
on pelagic organisms, but now with CO - driven ocean
One other measurement that may vary with tem- 2
acidifi cation being recognized as a serious threat, low
perature is tintinnid cell size. For, protists, in general,
pH has become topical in planktonic studies (e.g., Joint
Atkinson et al. (2003) have shown that for a 1 ° C
et al. 2011 ). It is rather ironic, then, that the only
increase there is a cell - size reduction of 2.5% of the
pH - based work on tintinnids focuses on raised levels,
volume observed at 15 ° C. To my knowledge, there are
potentially as a result of phytoplankton blooms remov-
no data on tintinnids (neither lorica nor cell size) to
ing CO in localized areas. Pedersen & Hansen (2003)
indicate that they too follow this trend. Given the argu- 2
indicate that the growth rate of F avella ehrenbergii is,
ments above that volume (and hence biomass) changes
relative to several other protists, very sensitive to pH:
can be important in ecological calculations (see section
above 8.8 mortality occurred, and this may be driven
“ Cell size, number, and growth rate ” on page 105 ), and
by autotrophs in cultures. By extension, in localized
oral lorica diameter relates to feeding (Section 4.2 ),
bays and fjords, where phytoplankton bloom, this tin-
this also is an area that requires study. For instance, we
tinnid may be driven to extinction. Similarly, in cul-
might ask if both cell and lorica size are infl uenced by
tures, where pH may increase, tintinnids may suffer;
temperature.
this may explain the decline in growth rate and demise
I now turn attention to the interaction between tem-
of tintinnids observed in cultures by Taniguchi &
perature and other factors. There is an interactive
Kawakami (1983) (e.g., Fig. 4.7 ). Clearly though, these
affect of temperature and food abundance on a growth
data do not address our present crisis of decreasing pH.
and ingestion rates of other heterotrophic protists (see
There is thus great scope for the use of tintinnids here,
Kimmance et al. 2006 ; Montagnes et al. 2008a ). We
especially as ocean acidifi cation could alter lorica for-
might then expect the same to occur for tintinnids. By
mation, notably of species whose loricae incorporate
replotting data from Verity (1985) , we can see that
calcareous matter, such as coccoliths (see Chapters 1
changes in both ingestion and growth rates do suggest
and 2 ).
interactions between temperature and prey abun-
dance on these processes (Fig. 4.17 ). By parameteriz-
ing responses for such data, Montagnes et al. (2008a)
Light
were able to predict the infl uence of temperature shifts
on a non - tintinnid ciliate. Possibly the data presented The effect of light on tintinnids has also been assessed,
in Fig. 4.17 could be used to the same end. to some extent. F avella sp. had higher ingestion rates in
Fig. 4.17 An indication of the interactive affect of temperature and food concentration on the growth and grazing rates of
two tintinnids (data replotted from Verity (1985) ) . (a, b) T intinnopsis acuminate ; (c, d) T intinnopsis vasculum.

114 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
the light, which Stoecker & Guillard (1982) attributed However, given that tintinnids reside in estuaries
to the ciliate exploiting prey patches (formed by the (Chapter 10 ), the little attention that has been paid
positively phototactic prey; see section “ Changes in to salinity appears to be a glaring oversight. Ironi-
swimming behaviour ” on page 110 ). C oxliella sp. also cally, it may be the, apparent, euryhaline distribution
exhibited increased growth and ingestion rates when of tintinnids (see, for example, Dolan & Gallegos
grown in the light (Strom 2001 ). Two explanations for 2001 ) that has deterred ecologists from pursuing
this were that increased processing of prey at satu- work in this direction. Still, I contest that it is the
rating food levels would reduce residence time, tintinnids ’ apparent ability to survive over a great
effectively then, as we have seen in Section 4.2 , han- range of salinities that should stimulate behavioral
dling time might be reduced. Alternatively, behavioral research across their observable ranges. Such data
changes in swimming, such as increased swimming could be instrumental in assessing competitive ad-
rates in the light, as has been shown for the naked oli- vantages. In fact, a recent study (Harvey & Menden -
gotrich Strombidium reticulatum (Jonsson 1989 ), might Deuer 2011 ) proposed that strong haloclines could
increase contact with prey, again as indicated in the prevent Favella ehrenbergii from occurring where the
section on “ Changes in swimming behaviour ” . In- toxic fl agellate Heterosigma akashiwo occurs; this
creased growth rate might simply be a function of would then benefi t the fl agellate, potentially allowing
increased ingestion, but Strom (2001) proposes sev- it to bloom. Clearly, as I seem to reiterate, there is
eral light - mediated physiological changes that could much scope here.
enhance digestion and thus also improve growth. Pos-
sibly, as individual tintinnids may be immobilized for
study (Taniguchi & Takeda 1988 ; Stoecker et al. 1995 ), 4.6 TINTINNIDS AS MODELS
it would be feasible to follow the rate of food vacuole AND IN MODELS
processing under various light levels, to test such
hypotheses. General models
At the start of this chapter, I indicate that tintinnids
Trace m etals and s alinity
are not the major group of planktonic ciliates. Further-
Trace metals have long been recognized to affect oligot- more, as we have seen, their lorica makes tintinnids
rich growth rate, with low levels being essential and functionally and behaviorally atypical of most plank-
higher levels causing inhibition (e.g., Gifford 1985 ). It tonic ciliates (Chapter 1 ). Why, then, is their study
is, therefore, not surprising that levels of copper and useful, in an ecophysiological and behavioral context?
zinc above those typically found in open waters had Of course, understanding tintinnid biology is useful, as
deleterious effects on the swimming and growth rate they do represent a component of the plankton (Chap-
of Favella sp. (Stoecker et al. 1986 ). However, it is also ters 1 and 9 ), but here I raise the question: can they act
noteworthy that there was interaction, as these two as a model for all planktonic ciliates?
metals will likely compete in binding at cell sites, with To answer this, it might be instructive to assess fi rst
increased zinc levels resulting (under some conditions) the role of model organisms. Montagnes et al. (2012)
in a reduction of copper toxicity on F avella sp. (Stoecker propose several criteria that make good models; by
et al. 1986 ). These data clearly illustrate the impor- using a subset of these traits, we can consider if tintin-
tance of multivariate analysis, when appropriate and nids are useful in this context (Table 4.4 ). In general,
possible. based on these criteria, I suggest that tintinnids have
Salinity is the single, major abiotic infl uence on substantial advantages over their naked relatives as
tintinnids that seems to have been generally over- models, with the caveat that their loricae make them
looked, with some notable exceptions: for example, in distinct and, therefore, limits some aspects of study.
a laboratory study, Jonsson (1989) found that several Thus, recognizing the guidance of Box & Draper
tintinnids were not limited in their distribution by a (1987) , “ Remember that all models are wrong; the
4 – 6 practical salinity unit (PSU) halocline; Stoecker practical question is how wrong do they have to be to
et al. (1984) found no correlation between salinity not be useful. ” , we can conclude that tintinnids are
and the distribution of Favella sp. in a small estuary. good models of planktonic ciliates.

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 115
Table 4.4 Tintinnids as model planktonic ciliates?
A model species should be: Level to which tintinnids possesses this trait
Positive Negative
Easier to study than the target it • Generally this seems to be so, as
is modelling tintinnids are as easy or easier to
culture than their naked relatives.
Relevant • They are globally distributed and at • They generally represent a
• ecologically times are abundant, even forming minority of the oligotrichs, the
• behaviorally blooms (Chapter9). major group of ciliates (see
• The behavior of tintinnids is Chapter9)
relatively easy to study, as the • Their behavior may differ
lorica can be held in place from other ciliates, when the
lorica acts as a confounding
factor
Similar in size to the target • They cover the same size range as
the naked oligotrichs
Inexpensive to obtain, maintain, • They can be collected all over the
and practical to use world, and cultures are relatively
easily maintained
Not rare or threatened • Given the wide distribution and
abundance, tintinnids are generally
not thought to be rare or threatened
Easy to identify • They have distinctive morphology • The lorica provides an
based on lorica, and this taxonomy inadequate means of
is well established identifi cation at times (see
Chapter3)
Easy to culture • Methods to culture them have been
well established (Gold1970; Gifford
1985; Kemp et al.1993)
Easy to manipulate in • Generally they are easy to
experiments (e.g., robust to manipulate, as the lorica means
manipulation) that they move slowly and makes
them more robust than naked
olgotrichs
Able to survive storage (e.g., • They produce cysts, which may in • The use of cysts for storage has
cryopreservation) the future be used to store cultures not yet be developed and they
cannot be cryopreserved
Fecund, with rapid generation • They have up to about two • Their life cycles are poorly
times divisions per day, which is understood
reasonably rapid for protozoa of its
size
Continued

116 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 4.4 Continued
A model species should be: Level to which tintinnids possesses this trait
Positive Negative
Able to produce clonal lines (to • Their ability to do this is well
separate environmental from established
genetic effects)
Stable in characteristics over • This has yet to be rigorously
many generations tested
Useful for interdisciplinary (e.g., • The vast study of them over the
molecular–ecological–numeric past approximately 50 years,
modelling) use coupled with modern methods,
suggests that they could be used
for interdisciplinary work
Long-standing, with a history of • There is over 100 years of research
use and substantial background on them
Unemotive (e.g., not being a • They do not tend to elicit emotive
target for animal rights) responses commensurate with acts
of animal cruelty
Favella from pole to pole (Chapter 10) , and it is relatively easy
to isolate, manipulate, and culture using established
Often, rather than a group of organism being the focus methods (see papers cited in the legend to Fig. 4.19 ),
of study, one taxon emerges as a model of robust use. making its study pragmatic.
Classic examples of organisms used in an interdisci- Favella may be one of the dominant planktonic cili-
plinary manner include the white rat (mammals), ates, at times (Stoecker et al. 1984 ), making it ecologi-
Daphnia (freshwater zooplankton), and E scherichia coli cally relevant. The relatively simple lorica shape (Fig.
(bacteria); we then might hope to fi nd one such tintin- 4.18 ), its well - defi ned oral and somatic ciliature (Kim
nid. Undoubtedly, the reader has recognized that one et al. 2010) , and its general cell shape also make it
taxon has arisen repeatedly in studies cited in this useful to examine behavioral traits. Furthermore,
chapter: Favella (Figs 4.18 and 4.19 ). I now turn atten- studies have revealed that Favella undergoes conju-
tion toFavella and assess the extent to which it repre- gation and forms cysts (Laval - Peuto 1983 ; Stoecker
sents a useful model of tintinnids and possibly for et al. 1983 ; Chapter 7 ), allowing these processes to
planktonic ciliates in general. be studied. In fact, possibly the most detailed studies
Again, we can rely on Table 4.4 as a guide to indi- on tintinnid encycstment and excycystment have
cate the use of Favella . This genus ranges in length focused on Favella (Chapter 7 ). Similarly, Favella has
from approximately 30 to 300 μ m, covering much of been a focal species for the study of tintinnid para-
the range of tintinnids and other naked ciliates. Its sitism (Chapter 6 ); again the hyaline lorica allows
lorica is hyaline, possibly limiting some aspects of study observations.
to this sub - group of tintinnids but allowing the cell to Identifi cation of Favella can be problematic as lorica
be seen when it is retracted; this makes observations shape is not necessarily reliable and morphological
such as food capture and food vacuole processing trac- identifi cation is taxing (Chapter 3 ). Nevertheless, there
table when it is held in position (Taniguchi & Takeda are both historic and recent studies identifying key
1988 ; Stoecker et al. 1995 ). Furthermore, species of species (see Kim et al. 2010 ), and the National Center
Favella are widely distributed in neritic waters almost for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank data

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 117
Fig. 4.18 An indication of F avella , a model tintinnid, based on images of F avella serrata . (a, b) from http://www.liv.ac.uk/
ciliate/Datasheets/f_serr.htm ; (c, d) with permission from F. Neidl.
set (September 2011) provides 37 sequences: 17 for years, indicating its long history of use, the extensive
Favella ehrenbergii ; 17 for Favella sp. and one for each data set on it, and its potential interdisciplinary role in
for Favella taraikaensis , Favella campanula , and Favella the study of microzooplankton (Fig. 4.19 ).
panamensis . However, it should be noted that the genus How well does Favella relate to naked planktonic cili-
might be polyphyletic (see Chapter 3 ). Furthermore, it ates in general? Immediately, the issue of possessing a
is becoming apparent that many protozoan species lorica makes any tintinnid, including F avella , inappro-
exhibit strong differences between clones (e.g., this priate for studying all aspects of naked ciliates. For
is the case for the model protozoan Oxyrrhis marina instance many naked non - loricate ciliates are capable
(Montagnes et al. 2011 )); similarly, unpublished work of jumping (or at least moving rapidly for short dis-
by D. Stoecker (personal communication) revealed that tances), and this is especially so for the “ Strobilidiid -
Favella clones isolated from the same sample exhibited like ” ciliates. As this swimming behavior allows naked
different thermal optima for growth. Consequently, for ciliates to escape predation (Jakobsen 2001 ), Favella
this genus (and other tintinnids), researchers must rec- would clearly be a poor model to investigate escape
ognize clonal variability. responses of this sort. In contrast, Favella would be an
Storage of Favella culture is also problematic, as it is ideal “ control ” , to compare with jumping ciliates. The
with most planktonic ciliates. Cultures tend to last for oral ciliature of the tintinnids is similar to the choreo-
months, rather than years, and then require replace- trichs but differs from that of the other major plank-
ment as they lose vitality (D. Stoecker, personal com- tonic group, the oligotrichs (the former has a closed
munication), presumably because of clonal decline circle of adoral membranelles, whereas the latter has
(see section “ An overview of tintinnid growth ” on page a C - shaped arrangement, see Chapter 3 ). Thus, F avella ,
99 ). However, for those researchers located by the and in fact all tintinnids, would probably be inappropri-
coast, new cultures are readily accessible, by enriching ate to provide a detailed model of water fl ow associated
natural samples (collected with a fi ne - mesh net) with with the oral region of oligotrichs. Finally, F avella cysts
appropriate prey (see Table 4.1 ). Finally, Favella has are similar in morphology to the few naked planktonic
been used in a range of studies over the past 35 – 40 ciliate cysts that have been studied (Chapter 7 ).

118 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Upper trophic level interactions
Taxonomy
Physical interactions
Parasites
Harmful algal blooms
Growth/Grazing
Ecophysiology
Cysts
Conjugation
Behaviour (a)
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Number of studies
seiduts
4
3
2 fo
rebmuN
1
0 (b)
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
Year
Fig. 4.19 An indication of the breadth and depth of study on the model genus F avella . (a) Fifty major studies on F avella were
each placed in a single general category that best represented the work, although there may be overlap with other categories.
(b) Number of studies per year were plotted over the past three and a half decades, to indicate the constant, but relatively
low - level, effort of work on F avella . Data are from Aelion & Chisholm (1985) ; Ayukai (1987) ; Buskey & Stoecker (1988,
1989) ; Carlsson et al. (1990) ; Coats et al. (1994) ; Fredrickson & Strom (2009) ; Fulco (2007) ; Graham & Strom (2010) ;
Hansen (1989, 1995) ; Hansen et al. 1991 ); Harvey & Menden - Deuer (2011) ; Kamiyama (1997, 2000 ); Kamiyama & Suzuki
(2006) ; Kamiyama et al. (2006) ; Kim et al. (2010) ; Kuwahara et al. (1975) ; Laval - Peuto (1983) ; Maniero et al. (2000) ;
Nagano et al. (2000) ; Pedersen & Hansen (2003) ; Rassoulzadegan (1978) ; Rosetta & McManus (2003) ; Shimeta et al. (1995) ;
Stoecker (1984, 1988) ; Stoecker & Egloff (1987) ; Stoecker & Evans (1985) ; Stoecker & Guillard (1982) ; Stoecker et al. (1981,
1983, 1986, 1987a, b, 1995) ; Strom & Loukos (1998) ; Strom et al. (1998, 2007) ; Suzuki & Taniguchi (1995) ; Taniguchi &
Takeda (1988) ; Taniguchi & Kawakami (1983, 1985) ; Turner & Tester (1992) .
It, therefore, seems that with some caveats, F avella population models (e.g., Buitenhuis et al. 2010 ). Typi-
could be a useful model to assess general traits. We can cally microzooplankton (organisms between 20 and
also determine some of the areas that may require 200 μ m; Chapter 9 ) have been represented by a single
further study by examining the breadth and depth of box (see, for example, Fig. 4.20 ), although more
work on this genus over the last three and a half detailed exceptions exist, where the microzooplankton
decades (Fig. 4.19 ); this should provide guidance and are recognized as too complex to be adequately modeled
encouragement for future studies. by a single component (e.g., Stickney et al. 2000 ).
Here, I explore the extent to which we can use tintinnid
data to parameterize the single microzooplankton box
Incorporation of t intinnids into m odels models.
In models similar to that depicted in Fig. 4.20 , the
Given the long history of study and relatively extensive microzooplankton, and for our purposes the tintinnids
data collected on tintinnids, it is not surprising that ( T ) and their prey (P ), can be represented by the follow-
they have been used to inform pelagic ecosystem and ing differential equations:

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 119
Fig. 4.20 An example of a schematic model of the pelagic ecosystem: the ERSEM model, re drawn from Blackford, J.C., Allen,
J.I & Gilbert, F.J. ( 2004) Ecosystem dynamics at six contrasting sites: a generic modelling study. Journal of Marine Systems, 52,
191 – 215, with permission from Elsevier .
dP the type II functional response) minus the proportion
=prey growth−tintinnid ingestion
dt of the population that dies, owing to a constant mor-
tality rate ( δ ). In some models this loss of tintinnids
dT =tintinnid growth−(mortality+respiration) may be divided into two components, mortality and
dt respiration, whereas in larger models an added loss
term would be imposed on the tintinnids by “ top - down
These two equations are often parameterized based control ” by grazing of mesozooplankton (see, for
on the Rosenzweig – MacArthur model (Turchin example, Blackford et al. 2004 ; Chapter 5 ) or poten-
2003 ), as: tially by parasites (see Montagnes et al. 2008b; Chapter
6 ). Typically, in such plankton models immigration
dP ⎛ P⎞ I P and emigration (the other two drivers of population
=μP ⎝⎜1− K⎠⎟− kma +x PT (4.6)
dt abundance (Turchin 2003 )) are ignored.
1/2
As can be seen in the previous sections of this
dT I P
=e MAX T−δT chapter, there are good estimates of the type II func-
(4.7)
dt k +P tional response, for a range of tintinnids. There are also
1/2
some estimates for tintinnid assimilation effi ciency (e ),
In this simple couplet of differential equations, prey although these are few (see section “ Gross growth and
growth is represented by logistic growth ( μ is the assimilation effi ciency ” on page 105 ), and as indicated
maximum prey growth and K is the prey carrying in Box 4.2 , e may vary with prey abundance. In con-
capacity); clearly in more complex models (e.g., Fig. trast, estimates for tintinnid mortality are non - existent
4.20 , but for an overview also see Miller (2004) ) prey (and potentially will vary with prey abundance, as has
growth will be governed by other factors, such as nutri- been observed for other another ciliate (Minter et al.
ent availability, and the recycling of nutrients by tintin- 2011 )), and there are few estimates of their respiration
nids may play a part in this. Prey loss in Equation 4.6 (see Verity 1985 ). Consequently, Equation 4.7 will be
is a function of tintinnid ingestion, which the astute poorly parameterized.
reader will recognize as the product of a type II func- Recently, Fenton et al. (2010) have formally recog-
tional response (Equation 4.2 ) and the tintinnid popu- nized another option, which admittedly has been
lation ( T ). Tintinnid population growth (Equation 4.7 ) applied to planktonic ciliates for over a decade (see,
is dictated by the fraction of ingested prey that is assim- for example, Montagnes & Lessard 1999 ). Rather than
ilated (i.e., the product of assimilation effi ciency, e , and relying on estimates of e and δ , it might be far simpler

120 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
to directly measure growth and mortality of tintinnids
and establish a numerical response (Equation 4.3 ).
Equation 4.7 could then be replaced by Equation 4.8 ,
which incorporates Equation 4.3 .
dT r (P−P′)
=T max (4.8)
dt k+P−P′
There are issues associated with using these two
equations. Possibly the most disconcerting of these is
the parameterization of the functional and numerical
responses. If the two are not carefully determined, it is
possible to develop a set of equations (Equations 4.6
and 4.8 ) that fail to adhere to mass conservation (e.g.,
more biomass could be made than is possible, given
consumption); this parallels issues associated with Fig. 4.21 The three - compartment food web studied by
estimating assimilation effi ciency (Box 4.2 ). Conse- Stoecker & Evan (1985) , consisting of the tintinnid F avella
quently, there is a need to carefully determine func- sp., the non - tintinnid ciliate B alanion sp., and the
tional and numerical responses under similar, well - autotrophuic dinofl agellate Heterocapsa triquetra . Arrows
represent the trophic integrations.
acclimated conditions, to prevent the generation of
unrealistic data.
Above, I have emphasized the potential for using tin-
tinnids to parameterize large - scale ecosystem models cally tintinnids may control prey blooms of the harmful
such as that depicted in Fig. 4.20 . However, protozoa, alga (Kamiyama et al. 2005 ). Using their func-
and specifi cally tintinnids may also be used to param- tional and numerical responses (also presented in
eterize relatively simple models that test fundamental Box 4.2 ) and assuming a constant growth rate of
principles, associated with plankton dynamics and the harmful dinofl agellate A lexandrium tamarense ,
general food - web theory. For instance, by solving dif- these authors modeled bloom dynamics and indi-
ferential equations, based on a three - compartment cated, among other issues, that, if A. tamarense con-
food web that was initially studied in the laboratory centration exceeds allowable limits for harvesting
(Fig. 4.21 ), Stoecker & Evans (1985) indicated that shellfi sh, and if there are suffi cient F avella taraikaensis
increasing the rate of tintinnid predation on the inter- (within realistic levels found in the fi eld), then tintinnid
mediate predator ( Balanion ) may increase stability grazing may reduce toxicity of bivalves that consume
(persistence) of the system. In another study, Strom & A. tamarense infl uences.
Loukos (1998) observed through laboratory work that Thus, tintinnid - based models offer substantive scope
Favella altered its preference for prey, in response to in their ability to address a range of ecological issues.
changing ratios of prey in incubation chambers. They Given the wealth of data on tintinnids and their rela-
then extended the empirical study by using modelling tive tractability as laboratory organisms, they should
methods, akin to those described above (Equations 4.6 lend themselves to further investigation to this end.
and 4.7 ) but with modifi cations, including terms Specifi c issues that we might consider addressing
to account for prey preference. Through these efforts are as follows: (1) simultaneously establishing coupled
Strom & Loukos (1998) revealed that switching of functional and numerical responses, to apply Equa-
prey preference based on selectivity (see, for example, tions 4.6 and 4.8 in models; (2) establishing the infl u-
section “ Selectivity other than size ” on page 98 ) led ence of biological factors such as prey switching,
toward stability (i.e., providing a refuge for preferred multiple trophic levels (e.g., Fig. 4.21 ), and changes in
prey at low abundances). A different example of a swimming/searching behavior, and incorporate these
model, derived from laboratory studies on a tintinnid into models; (3) establishing the infl uence of abiotic
supports arguments made above (see section “ Numer- factors, such as temperature, pH, and salinity on
ical response ” on page 101 ) that ciliates, and specifi - responses; and, possibly most diffi cult, (4) assessing

Ecophysiology and behavior of tintinnids 121
interactive effects of multiple factors on tintinnid 9. Not only do growth rate and feeding rate change
responses. In doing so, tintinnids, and specifi cally key with food abundance, tintinnid cell size changes with
taxa such as Favella , could provide us with useful food abundance; this can complicate measurements of
insights in to the role of microzooplankton in plank- tintinnid biomass production.
tonic ecosystems. 10. Both gross growth effi ciency and assimilation effi -
ciency may change with food abundance, and these
relationships need to be recognized when examining
4.7 KEY POINTS tintinnids.
11. Tintinnid swimming behavior changes owing to a
1. Feeding is a complex process in tintinnids, com- variety of factors (e.g., food abundance, type, toxicity),
posed of several steps that include behavioral traits and these behavioral changes may alter their feeding
such as handling and prey rejection. and thus their growth rates.
2. Although it is complex, tintinnid feeding can be 12. A range of abiotic factors affect tintinnid feeding
characterized by the functional response (ingestion and growth; the best studied of these is temperature,
rate versus food abundance) that follows a typical type but none (pH, salinity, toxins) have been suffi ciently
II response, which provides useful information about examined.
their biology and can be incorporated into food - web 13. Interaction between biotic and abiotic factors
models. infl uences tintinnid feeding and growth and undoubt-
3. Attributes associated with tintinnid feeding can be edly affects other processes.
correlated to the oral diameter of the lorica, potentially 14. Tintinnids may make good model organisms for
providing a metric for scaling responses. representing planktonic ciliates in general.
4. Tintinnid feeding selectivity is based both on size 15. One genus, Favella , stands out as a model
and other characteristics such as prey shape, move- tintinnid.
ment, and composition. 16. Tintinnids can be used to parameterize large - and
5. It is important to recognize that increase in numbers small - scale food - web models, and there is a need to
(reproduction) and sex are not linked in tintinnids (as improve estimates of several of the processes and
is the case for most protozoa). behaviors (outlined above) to allow them to be better
6. The tintinnid growth cycle is potentially complex, used in these models.
including cyst formation and clonal decline.
7. The numerical response (growth rate versus food
abundance) can be established for tintinnids and pro- ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
vides useful information about their biology and can be
incorporated into food - web models. I thank the co- authors of this book for their comments.
8. Like feeding attributes, some growth attributes of I also thank Klaus Hausmann, Denis Lynn, Tom
tintinnids may be scaled to the oral lorica diameter. Fenchel, and others for their comments and support.

Chapter 5
Predators of
Tintinnids
Diane K. Stoecker
University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science, Horn Point Laboratory,
Cambridge, MD, USA
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
122

Predators of tintinnids 123
5.1 INTRODUCTION not always indicate predation, especially in detritivores
that ingest organic aggregates, which may contain
Tintinnids, as members of the nanoplankton and empty loricae. This may particularly be a problem in
microplankton (Chapter 9 ), are prey of suspension - evaluating gut or fecal pellet contents of deep - sea zoo-
feeding zooplankton and benthic invertebrates. Most plankton and benthic invertebrates that feed on sinking
investigations of feeding by zooplankton and benthos organic material (Harding 1974 ; Gowing & Wishner
have focused on grazing on phytoplankton, but labora- 1986, 1992 ; Steinberg 1995 ).
tory and fi eld data show that protistan nano - and To estimate the contribution of tintinnids to the diet
microzooplankton can be an important component based on gut contents, it is critical to have information
of the diet suspension - feeders (reviewed in Stoecker on digestion times, which vary widely for different prey
& McDowell Capuzzo 1990 ; Gifford 1991 ; Pierce & types. For example, ctenophores (comb jellies) digest
Turner 1992 ; Sanders & Wickham 1993 ; Calbet & Saiz aloricate ciliates in a minute, take about 30 minutes to
2005 ). Small raptorial predators, such as fi sh larvae, digest tintinnids and up to 2.2 hours to digest adult
also consume microzooplankton (Montagnes et al. copepods (Sullivan 2010 ; Granhag et al. 2011 ). As a
2010 ). In the past 30 years, the contribution of micro- result, gut contents can under - represent the contri-
zooplankton, including ciliates, to planktonic biomass bution of tintinnids to diets compared with larger or
in surface waters has been quantifi ed. Ciliates are an more robust prey such as crustacean zooplankton and
important component of the prey fi eld available to diatoms but over - represent their contribution com-
zooplankton, fi sh larvae, and benthic invertebrates, pared with aloricate ciliates and other “ naked ” micro-
particularly when phytoplankton biomass is low or zooplankton. The problems in determining diet from
dominated by small size ( < 10 μ m) cells (Chapter 9) . fecal pellet contents are similar. For example, pieces
However, information on the role of protistan micro- of copepod carapace, diatom frustules, and loricae are
zooplankton, and in particular tintinnids and other often preserved, but aloricate ciliates and athecate
ciliates, in the diet of most zooplankton, icthyoplank- dinofl agellates are almost never recognizable in fecal
ton, and benthic invertebrate species is either lacking pellet contents. Thus, our knowledge of the diets of
or semi - quantitative. marine organisms based on gut or fecal pellet contents
Experimental data on predation on tintinnids are is biased.
rare. There are limited data on ingestion and clearance The application of molecular methods to detection
rates of tintinnids by copepods (mostly A cartia spp.), of tintinnids and other ciliates in the diet of zooplank-
ctenophores (comb jellies), and some cnidarians (jel- ton and other suspension feeders is in its infancy.
lyfi sh) from experiments using natural assemblages Ohman et al. (1991) showed that immunochemical
containing tintinnids or cultured tintinnids. There are techniques could detect predation by fi sh larvae on
few or no experimental data on predation by most an aloricate ciliate in the laboratory. More recently,
types of protistan and metazoan zooplankton (Tables quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has been
5.1 – 5.5 ), most species of fi sh larvae (Table 5.6 ), and applied to detection or estimation of copepod feeding
most suspension- feeding benthic invertebrates (Table on specifi c phytoplankton species (Nejstgaard et al.
5.7 ) on tintinnids. 2008 ; Simonelli et al. 2009 ; Haley et al. 2011 ).
The evidence for ingestion of planktonic ciliates by Sequences are now available for several tintinnids
most predators and grazers is the observation of intact (Chapter 3 ) as well as for aloricate ciliates common in
tintinnids or tintinnid loricae in gut or fecal pellet con- the marine plankton (Doherty et al. 2010 ; Tamura et
tents. However, lack of tintinnids in gut and fecal pellet al. 2011 ) and thus it should be possible to apply quan-
contents does not always indicate lack of predation on titative PCR to estimation of predation on particular
tintinnids. Some protistan and invertebrate predators ciliate taxa. However, although differential digestion
extract the tintinnid cell from the lorica before inges- can still be a problem with molecular techniques just
tion (Stoecker & Sanders 1985 ; Tackx et al. 1995 ; as it is with traditional gut contents analyses (Troeds-
Uchida et al. 1997 ; Smalley et al. 1999 ). Whether or son et al. 2009 ), application of molecular methods for
not ingestion of the lorica occurs probably depends on prey detection should yield new insights into predation
the size and species of zooplankton as well as size and on tintinnids and specifi cally on the relative impor-
type of lorica. On the other hand, presence of empty tance of tintinnids and aloricate ciliates in the diets of
loricae in gut contents or fecal pellet contents does many predators.

124 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 5.1 Protistan predators of tintinnids.
Predator Tintinnid prey Evidence Reference
Dinofl agellates
Gyrodinium Favella azorica,F. taraikaensis, Observations of feeding Uchida et al.1997
instriatum Eutintinnus tubulosus
Ceratium furca Unidentifi ed tintinnids Food vacuole contents Smalley et al.1999
Noctiluca Tintinnopsis spp., Food vacuole contents Andersen& S ørensen1986;
scintillans Codonellopsis spp., Fonda-Umani et al.2004;
Tintinnidium spp., Sato et al.2010
Tintinnidium muciocola,
Stenosemella nivalis
Otherciliates
Favella Tintinnopsis tubulosa Laboratory feeding Robertson1983
panamensis experiment
Favella serrata T. beroidea Food vacuole contents Lebour1922
Favella sp. T. minuta,T. acuminata Food vacuole contents Verity1986b
Radiolarians
Collozoum Unidentifi ed tintinnids Loricae in fecal strands Swanberg& Anderson 1981
caudatum
Collozoum Unidentifi ed tintinnids Loricae in fecal strands Swanberg& Harbison 1980;
longiforme Swanberg& Caron 1991
Diplosphaera Unidentifi ed tintinnids Tintinnids in pseudopodial Anderson1983
sp. network
Hexastylus sp. Unidentifi ed tintinnids Tintinnids in pseudopodial Anderson1983
network
Spongodrymus Unidentifi ed tintinnids Tintinnids in pseudopodial Swanberg et al.1986,
sp. network Anderson1983
Physematium Unidentifi ed tintinnids Tintinnids in pseudopodial Swanberg et al.1986,
muelleri network Swanberg& Anderson
1985
Phaeodarian Unidentifi ed tintinnids Empty loricae but not cellular Gowing& Béntham 1994
radiolarians remains in food vacuoles
Planktonic
Foraminifera
Globigerinoides Unidentifi ed tintinnids Tintinnids in pseudopodial Caron& B é1984, Anderson
sacculifer network 1993

Predators of tintinnids 125
Table 5.2 Copepod predators of tintinnids.
Predator Tintinnid prey Evidence Reference
Calanoid
Acartia clausi Favella tarakaensis , Feeding experiment Ayukai1987; Broglio et al.2001
Helicostomella
fusiformis,Metacylis sp.
Acartia hongi Eutintinnus sp. Feeding experiment Yang et al.2010
Acartia hudsonica Eutintinnus pectinis Feeding experiment Turner& Anderson1983
Acartia tonsa Favella panamensis , Feeding experiment Robertson1983; Stoecker&
Favella sp.; Eutintinnus Sanders1985; Stoecker&
sp.Tintinnopsis sp.,T. Egloff1987; Gifford& Dagg
beroidea,T. brasiliensis , 1988, 1991; Tackx et al. 1995 ;
T. parva,T. tubulosa Vargas& Gonz ález2004 ;
Diodato& Hoffmeyer2008
Acartia spp. Eutintinnus sp. , Feeding experiment Rollwagen - Bollens& Penry
Codonellopsis sp. 2003
Aetideopsis antarctica Cymatocylis antarctica Gut contents Hopkins1987
Laackmanniella
naviculaefera ,
Codonellopsis gaussi ,
Calanus australis Unidentifi ed tintinnids Feeding experiment Sanchez et al.2011
Calanus fi nmarchicus Tintinnus subulatus , Gut contents Marshall1924
Stenosemella
ventricosa
Helicostomella subulata
Calanus cristatus , Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Arashkevich1969
C. plumchrus
Calanus pacifi cus Unidentifi ed tintinnids Feeding experiment Leising et al. 2005a
Calanus tenuicornis Unidentifi ed tintinnids Fecal pellet Turner1984a
Calanus propinquus Codonellopsis gaussi , Gut contents Hopkins1987
Laackmanniella
naviculaefera ,
Cymatocylis antarctica
Centropages typicus H elicostomella subulata Gut contents Lebour1922
Eucalanus bungii Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Arashkevich1969
Eucalanus pileatus Salpingella sp. Fecal pellet Turner1984b
Euchaeta antarctica Codonellopsis gaussi , Gut contents Hopkins1987
Laackmanniella
naviculaefera ,
Cymatocylis antarctica
Euchaeta erebi Codonellopsis gaussi , Gut contents Hopkins1987
Cymatocylis antarctica
Euchaeta similis Cymatocylis antarctica Gut contents Hopkins1987
Gaedius pungens U nidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Arashkevich1969
Gaetanus pileatus
Continued

126 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 5.2 Continued
Predator Tintinnid prey Evidence Reference
Metridia spp. Unidentifi ed tintinnids Feeding experiment Lonsdale et al.2000
Metridia gerlachei Codonellopsis gaussi, Gut contents Hopkins1987
Laackmanniella
naviculaefera,
Cymatocylis antarctica
Metridia ornata, Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Arashkevich1969
Metridia ochotensis
Oncaea curvata Codonellopsis gaussi Gut contents Hopkins1987
Paracalanus quasimodo Unidentifi ed tintinnids Fecal pellet Turner1984b
Pleuromamma xiphas Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Arashkevich1969
Pseudocalanus newmani Unidentifi ed tintinnids Feeding experiment Leising et al. 2005b
Pseudochirella polyspina Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Arashkevich1969
Tortanus setacaudatus Favella panamensis Feeding experiment Robertson1983
Cyclopoid
Limnoithona tetraspina Unidentifi ed tintinnid Feeding experiment Bouley& Kimmerer 2 006
Oithona similis Codonellopsis gaussi; Gut contents Hopkins1987; Nishibe et al.
Unidentifi ed tintinnids Feeding experiment 2010
Oithona spp. Unidentifi ed tintinnids Feeding experiment Lonsdale et al.2000
Table 5.3 Euphausiid and other large crustacean zooplankton predators of tintinnids (all evidence from gut contents).
Predator Tintinnid prey Reference
Euphausiids
Bentheuphausia amblyops Unidentifi ed tintinnids Mauchline1980
Euphausia diomedeae Unidentifi ed tintinnids Mauchline1980
Euphausia crystallorophias Codonellopsis gaussi,Laackmanniella Hopkins1987
naviculaefera,Cymatocylis antarctica
Euphausia pacifi ca Unidentifi ed tintinnids Mauchline& Fisher 1969;
Nakagawa et al.2001
Euphausia similis Unidentifi ed tintinnids Mauchline1980
Euphausia superba (Antarctic krill) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Mauchline1980
Meganyctiphanes norwegica Helicostomella spp.,Paravella spp. Hedin1975b
Nematoscelis gracilis,N. mirops Unidentifi ed tintinnids Mauchline1980
Thysanoessa inermis Unidentifi ed tintinnids Mauchline& Fisher 1969
T. longicaudata,T.longipes,
T.raschii,T. tricuspidata
Thysanoessa macrura Codonellopsis gaussi,Laackmanniella Hopkins1987
naviculaefera,Cymatocylis antarctica

Predators of tintinnids 127
Table 5.3 Continued
Predator Tintinnid prey Reference
Mysids
Antarctomysis ohlinii Codonellopsis gaussi,Laackmanniella Hopkins1987
naviculaefera,Cymatocylis antarctica
Mysis mixta Unidentifi ed tintinnids Mauchline1980
Neomysis mixta Unidentifi ed tintinnids Rudstam et al. 1989
Penaeids
Bentheogennema borealis Unidentifi ed tintinnids Omori 1974
Sergestes similis Unidentifi ed tintinnids Omori 1974
Caridea
Hymenodora frontalis Unidentifi ed tintinnids Omori 1974
Physetocaris microphthalma Unidentifi ed tintinnids Omori 1974
Amphipods
Epimeriella macronyx Codonellopsis gaussi,Laackmanniella Hopkins1987
naviculaefera,Cymatocylis antarctica
Eusirus tridentatus Codonellopsis gaussi,Laackmanniella Hopkins1987
naviculaefera,Cymatocylis antarctica
Hyperiella dilatata Codonellopsis gaussi,Laackmanniella Hopkins1987
naviculaefera,Cymatocylis antarctica
Orchomene plebs Codonellopsis gaussi,Laackmanniella Hopkins1987
naviculaefera
Orchomene rossi Cymatocylis antarctica Hopkins1987
Table 5.4 Gelatinous zooplankton predators of tintinnids.
Predator Tintinnid prey Evidence Reference
Cnidarians
Hydromedusae
Aglantha digitale (pink Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Larson(1987)
helmet)
Mitrocoma cellularia (cross Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Larson(1987)
jellyfi sh)
Aglaura hemistoma Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents (live Colin et al.(2005)
specimens)
Mitrocomella polydiademata Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Larson(1987)
Phialidium spp. Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Larson(1987)
Proboscidactyla fl avicirrata Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Larson(1987)
Sarsia princeps Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Larson(1987)
Continued

128 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 5.4 Continued
Predator Tintinnid prey Evidence Reference
Scyphomedusae
Aurelia aurita (moon jelly) Tintinnopsis sp., Feeding exp Stoecker et al.1987b
Favella sp.
Chrysaora quinquecirrha (sea Unidentifi ed tintinnids Feeding exp Olesen et al.1996
nettle) ephyrae
Cotylorhiza tuberculata Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Pérez-Ruzafa et al.2002
Rhizostoma pulmo Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Pérez-Ruzafa et al.2002
Stomolophus meleagris Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Larson1991
(cannonball jelly)
Ctenophores
Bolinopsis infundibulum Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Costello& Coverdale 1998
Pleurobrachia bachei Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Larson(1987)
Pleurobrachia pileus Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Costello& Coverdale 1 998
Mnemiopsis leidyi, larvae Favella sp., Feeding exp; gut Stoecker et al.1987a;
and post larvae Tintinnopsis sp., contents Sullivan& Gifford 2 007;
unidentifi ed Sullivan2010; Granhag
tintinnids et al.2011
Planktonic tunicates
Salps Favella philippinensis, Gut contents Naidu1983
Tintinnopsis spp.,
Leprotintinnus spp.,
Eutintinus tenuis
Doliolids Favella philippinensis, Gut contents Naidu1983
Tintinnopsis spp.,
Leprotintinnus spp.,
Eutintinus tenuis
Oikopleura spp./ Favella philippinensis, Gut contents; Naidu1983; Urban et al.
O. vanhoeffeni Tintinnopsis spp., Fecal pellet 1992
Leprotintinnus spp., contents
Eutintinus tenuis;
Stenosemela steini
Pteropods
Limacina helicina Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents Paranjape1968 cited in
Sanders& Wickham 1 993;
Gilmer& Harbison 1 991
Chaetognaths
Sagitta elegans, chaetognath Helicostomella, Gut contents Pearre1973, 1981,
(young, stage I) Parafavella Alvarez-Cadena1993

Predators of tintinnids 129
Table 5.5 Other holoplanktonic predators of tintinnids.
Predator Tintinnid prey Evidence Reference
Rotifers
Synchaeta vorax Tintinnopsis sp. Gut contents Lam-Hoai et al.1997
Ostracods
Conchoecia belgicae Codonellopsis gaussi, Gut contents Hopkins1987
Laackmanniella naviculaefera,
Cymatocylis antarctica
Conchoecia isocheira Cymatocylis antarctica Gut contents Hopkins1987
Cladocerans
Evadne nordmanni Favella philippinensis,Tintinnopsis Observed holding prey Bainbridge1958
Penillia sp. spp.,Leprotintinnus spp., after preservation; Naidu1983
Eutintinus tenuis gut contents
Table 5.6 Larval fi sh predators of tintinnids (all evidence solely from gut contents unless otherwise noted).
Predator Tintinnid prey Reference
FamilyAcanthuridae
Paracanthurus hepatus (common Amphorellopsis acuta Nagano et al.2000
surgeonfi sh)
Family Ammodytidae
Ammodytes personatus (Japanese Codonellopsis morchella, Nagano et al.2001
sand lance) Helicostomella fusiformis,
Stenosemella nivalis
Ammodytes tobianus (sand lance) Unidentifi ed tintinnids LeBour1918
Family Atnerinidae
Hypoatherina tropicalis (silverside) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Schmitt1986
Family Atherinopsidae
Atherinopsis californiensis (jacksmelt) Stenosemella sp. Watson& Davis 1 989
Leuresthes tenuis (California grunion) Stenosemella sp. Watson& Davis 1 989
Larval atherinids Unidentifi ed tintinnids Kauffman et al.1981
Family Carangidae
Trachurus symmetricus (jack mackerel) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Arthur1976
Family Centropomidae
Centropomus undecimalis (common Unidentifi ed tintinnids E-Wittenrich et al.2009
snook)
Continued

130 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 5.6 Continued
Predator Tintinnid prey Reference
Family Clinidae
Heterostichus rostratus (giant kelpfi sh) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Stepien1986
Family Clupeidae
Anchoa mitchilli (Bay anchovy) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Detwyler& Houde 1970
Brevoortia patronus (Gulf menhaden) Favella sp. Govoni et al.1983; Stoecker&
Govoni1984
Clupea harengus (Atlantic herring) Stenosemella ventricosa Hentschel1950; Sherman& Honey
Tintinnopsis spp. 1971; Lebour1919b; 1923 ;
Courtois& Dodson 1 986; Sanders
& Wickham 1 993
Sardina pilchardus (sardine or Unidentifi ed tintinnids Morote et al.2010
European pilchard)
Sprattus sprattus (synonym: C lupea Tintinnopsis ventricosa Lebour1919b; Fortier& Harris 1 989
sprattus) (sprat) (= S. ventricosa)
Sardinops sagax (Pacifi c sardine) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Arthur1976
Family Engraulidae
Engraulis mordax (Californian anchovy) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Brewer& Kleppel 1986; Arthur 1 976
Engraulis ringens (anchoveta) Codonellopsis pusilla, De Mendiola1974
Craterella urceolata,
Helicostomella longa
Mallotus villosus (capelin) Tintinnopsis sp. Courtois& Dodson 1986
Encrasicholina purpurea (synonym: Unidentifi ed tintinnids Schmitt1986
Stolephorus purpureus) (n ehu)
Family Gadidae
Gadus morhua (cod) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Bainbridge& McKay 1968 cited in
Last1978b; Last1978b; Van Der
Meeren& Naess 1993; Fossum&
Ellertsen1994
Melanogrammus aeglefi nus (haddock) Stenosemella nucula,S. Ogilvie1938
ventricosa,Acanthostemeela
norvegica,Favella denticulata
Merlangius merlangus (whiting) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Last1978b
Micromesistius poutassou (blue Unidentifi ed tintinnids Conway1980
Whiting)
Trisopterus luscus (bib) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Last1978b
Family Gobioididae
Gobiid larvae Unidentifi ed tintinnids Houde& Lovdal 1984
Family Haemulidae
Orthopristis chrysoptera (pigfi sh) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Houde& Lovdal 1984

Predators of tintinnids 131
Table 5.6 Continued
Predator Tintinnid prey Reference
Family Labridae
Labrus ( bergylta type) wrasse Tintinnopsis beroidea, Lebour1919c
Cittarocyclis denticulate
Family Merlucciidae
Macruronus novaezelandiae (blue Codonella elongate, Murdoch1990
grenadier) Petalotricha pacifi ca,
Parundella caudate,
Proplectella fastigata,
Dictyocysta fenestrata,
D. reticulata,Amphorella
brandtii
Family Ophichthidae
Myrophis sp. (worm eel) Codonellopsis spp. Govoni2010
Family Paralepididae
Paralepis sp. Unidentifi ed tintinnids Duka& Gordina 1973
Family Paralichthyidae
Paralichthys californicus (California Stenosomella sp. Watson& Davis 1989
halibut)
Paralichthys dentatus (Summer Unidentifi ed tintinnids Grover1998
fl ounder)
Family Pleuronectidae
Limanda limanda (dab) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Last1978a
Platichthys fl esus (European fl ounder) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Last1978a
Parophrys vetulus (s yn=Isopsetta Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gadomski& Boehlert 1 984
isolepis) (English sole)
Pseudopleuronectes americanus Unidentifi ed tintinnids Shaheen et al.2004
(Winter fl ounder) Pearcy1962
Family Rhombosoleidae
Ammotretis rostratus (longsnout Tintinnopsis sp.,Favella sp. Jenkins1987, 1988
fl ounder)
Rhombosolea tapirina (Greenback Favella sp,Tintinnopsis sp. Jenkins1987, 1988
fl ounder)
Family Sciaenidae
Genyonemus lineatus (white croaker) Stenostomella sp., Brewer& Kleppel 1986; Watson &
Codonaria sp. Davis1989
Leiostomus xanthurus (spot) Tintinnopsis sp., S tenosemella Govoni et al.1983; Govoni& Chester
sp.,Codonellopsis sp., 1990
Dictyocysta sp.
Continued

132 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 5.6 Continued
Predator Tintinnid prey Reference
Micropogonias undulatus (Atlantic Stenosemella sp. Govoni et al.1983
croaker)
Seriphus politus (queenfi sh) Stenosemella sp., Watson& Davis 1 989
Codonaria sp.
Family Scophthalmidae
Zeugopterus norvegicus (synonyms: T. ventricosa ( =S. ventricosa) Lebour1919c
Phrynorhombus norvegicus,
Scophthalmus norvegicus)
Norwegian topknot
Family Scorpaenidae
Sebastiscus marmoratus (fi refi sh) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Nagano et al.2001
Family Serranidae
Epinephelus septemfasciatus (convict Favella taraikaensis Nagano et al.2000
grouper)
Paralabrax sp. Stenosemella sp. Watson& Davis 1989
Family Soleidae
Microchirus variegates (thickback sole) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Lebour1918
Solea solea (sole) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Last1978a
Solea ovata (= Solea variegata) Tintinnopsis ventricosa ( =S. Lebour1919
ventricosa)
Family Sparidae
Archosargus rhomboidalis (Western Unidentifi ed tintinnids Stepien1976
Atlantic seabream)
Family Sternoptychidae
Maurolicus sp. (deep sea hatchetfi sh) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Duka& Gordina 1 973
Family Syngnathidae
Syngnathus sp. (pipefi sh) Favella ehrenbergii Capriulo& Ninivaggi 1 982
E, feeding or rearing experiment.
Table 5.7 Benthic invertebrate and meroplanktonic larval predators of tintinnids.
Predator Tintinnid prey Evidence Ref
Mollusks
Bivalve and gastropod Favella philippinensis, Gut contents Naidu1983
veligers Tintinnopsis spp.
Mytilus edulis (blue Mussel) Tintinnopsis spp. Enclosure experiments Horsted et al.1988
Ostrea edulis (oyster) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Ingested Krsinic1987 cited in
Sanders& Wickham 1 993

Predators of tintinnids 133
Table 5.7 Continued
Predator Tintinnid prey Evidence Ref
Crinoids
Lamprometra klunzingeri, Cyttarocylis eucecryphalus, Gut contents Rutman& Fishelson 1969
Heterometra savignii, Codonellopsis
Capillaster multiradiatus morchella,Proplectella
(feather-stars) spp.,Epiplocylis undella
and other spp.
Antedon bifi da (feather star) Unidentifi ed tintinnids Gut contents La Touche& West 1980
Cnidaria
Aurelia aurita polyps Favella ehrenbergii Feeding exp Kamiyama2011
Crustacea
Aratus pisonii zoeae Favella ehrenbergi Feeding exp Schwamborn et al.2006
(grapsid crab larvae)
Uca sp. Stage 1 zoea Favella panamensis, Feeding exp Robertson1983
(fi ddler crab larvae) Tintinnopsis tubulosa
Ectoprocta (bryozoans)
Cyphonautes (bryozoan Tintinnopsis sp. Gut contents Lebour1922
larvae)
Phoronida (horseshoe
worms)
Actinotrocha (larvae of Helicostomella subulata, Gut contents Lebour1922
worm,Phoronis sp.) Tintinnoposis beroidea
Tintinnid abundance and species composition is 5.1 ). Tintinnids can prey on smaller tintinnids. F avella
variable both seasonally and spatially (Chapter 1 0) . In spp. prey on smaller T intinnopsis spp. as well as on dino-
most plankton communities most of the time, tintin- fl agellates and aloricate ciliates (LeBour 1922 ; Robert-
nids are less abundant than aloricate ciliates and other son 1983 ; Verity 1986 ). Predation on other tintinnids
microzooplankton; however, episodically tintinnids is probably more common in Favella than in other
can dominate microzooplankton assemblages, espe- many other tintinnid species because of Favella ’ s com-
cially in coastal waters (Chapter 9 ). Because most fi eld paratively large size, but it is also more obvious than it
studies provide “ snapshots ” of the diet, tintinnids are would be in many other species because of Favella ’ s
often reported as a dietary component of a grazer or hyaline lorica, which allows easy microscopic observa-
predator in one investigation but not another, even tion of ingested prey (Fig. 5 .1) .
from the same location or season. The presence of tin- Both heterotrophic and mixotrophic dinofl agellates
tinnids in the diet is often an indicator that planktonic prey on tintinnids (Table 5.1 ). The bloom - forming het-
ciliates in general are an important, and probably over- erotrophic dinofl agellate, Noctiluca scintillans, preys on
looked, dietary component. microplankton, including tintinnids (Fonda Umani et
al. 2004 ; Sato et al. 2010 ). Some mixotrophic dinofl ag-
ellates, including Ceratium furca and Gyrodinium ins-
5.2 PREDATORS OF TINTINNIDS triatum , ingest tintinnid cells without the lorica (Uchida
et al. 1997 ; Smalley et al. 1999 ). G . instriatum has been
Other protists observed to extract large tintinnids from their lorica
and then engulf the cell (Fig. 5.2 ). Because many dino-
The microbial food web is complex, with protists fl agellates do not ingest the lorica, their predation on
preying on other protists, including tintinnids (Table tintinnids can be diffi cult to detect. Many mixotrophic

134 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
and heterotrophic dinofl agellates prey on a wide size
range of protists using a peduncle (Jeong et al. 2010 )
and it is likely that they include tintinnids in their
diet. In addition to traditional predators, tintinnids
also have dinofl agellate ectoparasites, D uboscquella
and Tintinnophagus ; these could be considered preda-
tors as they devour the host from the outside (see
Chapter 6 ).
In tropical and subtropical oceans, the planktonic
sarcodines (Radiolaria, Acantharia and Foraminifera)
are important in biogeochemical cycles as well as
common predators on tintinnids (Caron & Swanberg
1990 ) (Table 5.1 ). Tintinnids and their empty loricae
are abundant in the fecal strands of large colonial radi-
olaria ( Collozoum spp.) and are common in the pseu-
dopodial networks of solitary polycystine radiolarian
(Table 5.1 ). Swanberg & Caron (1991) investigated
sarcodine diets in surface waters of the subtropical
Atlantic. Tintinnids were observed in the pseudopodial
networks of 17% of the polycystine radiodiolaria,
19% of Acantharia, and 3% of the Foraminifera but
accounted for only 3, 7, and < 1%, respectively, of the
estimated biomass ingested. Tintinnids appear to be
a preferred prey of Acantharia and polycystine Radi-
olaria but not Foraminifera (Caron & Be 1984 ; Swan-
berg & Caron 1991 ). Low numbers of aloricate ciliates
are found in the pseudopodial networks of the sarcod-
ines, but because aloricates are digested rapidly, their
contribution to the diet is probably severely underesti-
mated relative to the tintinnids. Below the euphotic
zone, phaeodarian Radiolaria are more abundant than
polycystine Radiolaria. Gowing & Bentham (1994)
observed empty tintinnid loricae, but not loricae with
cellular content, in the food vacuoles of phaeodaria
from sediment traps in the North Pacifi c. The phaeo-
darians may have ingested sinking, empty loricae
along with detritus.
Copepods
Copepods are the dominant metazoan zooplankton in
Fig. 5.1 Favella from an Indian mangrove estuary with an
food webs that support fi sheries. Based on gut or fecal
ingested Tintinnopsis , one of several with ingested tintinnid
pellet contents (e.g., Fig. 5.3 ), predation on tintinnids
remains from the same sample (J. Dolan, personal
is common among copepods including members of
communication).
the calanoid copepod families Acartidae, Aetideidae,
Calanidae, Clausocalanidae, Eucalananidae, Euchae-
tidae, Metridinidae, Paracalanidae, and Tortanidae
(Table 5.2 ). This includes most of the common
suspension- feeding copepods regarded as herbivorous

Predators of tintinnids 135
Fig. 5.2 Time course (a – d) of the feeding of G yrodinium instriatum , a mixotrophic dinofl agellate, on the tintinnid F avella
azorica . Figure from Uchida, T., Kamiyama, T. & Matsuyama, Y., Predation by a photosynthetic dinofl agellate G yrodinium
instriatum on loricated ciliates. Journal of Plankton Research, 1997 , 19, 603 – 608, by permission of Oxford University Press.
“ b looms” when they may account for most of the fecal
pellet contents (Turner & Anderson 1983 ).
C ompared with gut and fecal content studies, there
have been relatively few measurements of feeding by
copepods on tintinnids (Table 5.2 ). Laboratory feeding
experiments have been conducted with mixtures of
cultured ciliates and phytoplankton that are within
the range of densities observed in coastal environ-
Publisher's Note: ments for these prey types. The common estuarine and
Image not available coastal copepodAcartia tonsa has higher clearance for
in the electronic edition tintinnids and other ciliates than for phytoplankton
in these prey mixtures (Stoecker & Sanders 1 985;
Stoecker & Egloff 1987 ). Inclusion of tintinnids in a
phytoplankton- b ased diet can enhance egg production
by calanoid copepods (Stoecker & Egloff 1987 ; Kleppel
1 993) . Feeding experiments with natural prey assem-
blages and the calanoid copepods A cartia , Calanus ,
Metridia , and Pseudocalanus spp. are consistent with
the results using cultures. Copepods usually have
Fig. 5.3 Tintinnid lorica ( Salpingella sp.) in a fragmented
fecal pellet of the copepod E ucalanus pileatus from the Gulf higher clearance rates for tintinnids (if abundant) and
of Mexico. Figure from Turner (1984b) with permission of aloricate ciliates than for phytoplankton (Turner &
InterResearch. Anderson 1983 ; Gifford & Dagg 1988, 1993 ; Lonsdale
et al. 2 000; Rollwagen Bollens & Penry 2 003; Leising
et al. 2005b ; Diodato & Hoffmeyer 2008 ). This sug-
or omnivorous (for example A cartia , Calanus , Eucala- gests that copepod predation on tintinnids as well as on
nus , Paracalanus ) as well as predatory calanoids such as other microzooplankters can lead to trophic cas-
Euchaeta and T ortanus (Mauchline 1998 ). Tintinnids cades, releasing phytoplankton from microzooplank-
are also prey of the planktonic ambush- f eeding cyclo- ton grazing pressure (Stoecker & Sanders 1 985; Irigoien
poid copepods,Oithona and L imnoithona (Table 5.2 ). In et al. 2005 ; Reaugh et al. 2007 ; Calbet & Saiz 2005 ).
most cases, tintinnids, even when they are a frequent An interesting question is whether tintinnids are
component of the gut or fecal pellet contents, appear more or less susceptible to copepod predation than
to be a minor component of the diet in terms of other microzooplankton. In laboratory feeding experi-
biomass. An exception to this is during tintinnid ments, adultAcartia tonsa have higher clearance rates

136 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
for the aloricate ciliate Strobilidium spp. than the larger E. superba (Antarctic krill), E . crystallorophias (ice
tintinnid Favella sp. but have higher clearance for krill), and Meganyctiphanes norwegica (northern krill)
Favella sp. than a smaller T intinnopsis sp. However, (Mauchline & Fisher 1969 ) (Table 5.3 ). Krill are
copepod nauplii appear to prefer Tintinnopsis species thought to feed primarily on large diatoms, but tin-
over Favella species (Stoecker & Egloff 1987 ). In experi- tinnids can constitute over 50% of the recognizable
ments withA. clausi , clearance of the tintinnid M eta- stomach contents inEuphausia pacifi ca in the northern
cylis species was higher than of the similar size aloricate northwest Pacifi c (Nakagawa et al. 2001 ). However,
ciliate, S trobilidium spiralis . Broglio et al. (2001) suggest tintinnids may not be preferred prey. In experiments in
that this was because S . spiralis had jumping behavior a Chilean fjord,E. vallentini fed mostly on phytoplank-
that reduces capture. However, not all aloricate ciliates ton, and clearance of tintinnids and other microzoo-
“ jump ” . In fact, in experiments with natural assem- plankton was not signifi cant (Sanchez et al. 2011 ).
blages of phytoplankton and microzooplankton, clear- Overall, the signifi cance of tintinnids in the diet of krill
ance by Acartia spp. of tintinnids is usually lower than is unknown, but it is possible that tintinnids and other
of aloricate ciliates (Rollwagen Bollens & Penry 2003 ). microzooplankton, although not major components of
In feeding experiments with C alanus australis and the diet, are nutritionally important high - quality food
natural prey assemblages, the copepods showed prefer- items. Because of their abundance in the environment,
ence for tintinnids over non - thecate heterotrophic it is likely that aloricate ciliates are generally more
dinofl agellates (Sanchez et al. 2011 ). important than tintinnids as prey for euphausiids, but
Cyclopoid copepods are ambush predators on motile because almost all data on euphausiid diets are from
prey and show strong prey preferences among micro- gut contents, it is not possible to evaluate the relative
plankton. Oithonia spp. have higher clearance for importance.
tintinnids and other ciliates than for heterotrophic Among other large crustacean zooplankton, tintin-
dinofl agellates, but higher clearance for aloricate nids or their loricae occur in the gut contents of mysids,
ciliates than co - occurring tintinnids in natural penaeid and carid shrimp, and amphipods (Table 5.3 ).
prey assemblages (Lonsdale et al. 2000 ; Nishibe et al. The overall signifi cance of tintinnids and other micro-
2010 ). L imnoithona tetraspina , another cyclopoid zooplankton in their diets is unknown.
copepod, feeds readily on aloricate ciliates such as M es-
odinium and S trombidium spp. but has relatively low
feeding rates on tintinnids (Bouley & Kimmerer 2006 ). Gelatinous zooplankton including
Presumably the generally higher clearing rates of cnidarians, ctenophores, chaetognaths,
calanoid and cyclopoid copepods for tintinnids and pteropods and pelagic tunicates
other ciliates than for dinofl agllates is because the cili-
ates generate a greater hydrodynamic signal than Tintinnid ciliates are consumed by gelatinous pre-
the dinofl agellates, and thus are detected more readily dators including cnidarians (medusae), ctenophores
(Jakobsen et al. 2005 ). The generally greater clearance (comb jellies), and chaetognaths (arrow worms) as well
by copepods of aloricate ciliates than of tintinnids as gelatinous suspension feeders such as the thecos-
may be due to differences in their hydrodynamic signal tome pteropods and pelagic tunicates (Table 5.4 ).
strength, differences in handling time and predator Medusae are primarily carnivorous, and most of the
defenses or a combination of these factors. larger medusa consume crustacean zooplankton, fi sh
larvae and fi sh eggs. However, some medusae are
suspension feeders on microplankton, including tin-
Euphausiids and other large crustacean tinnids and other ciliates. Suspension feeding on
zooplankton microplankton may be particularly common among
the smaller hydromedusae (Colin et al. 2005 ). Tintin-
Another important group of marine crustacean zoo- nids were 25% of the recognizable prey items, but
plankton is the euphausiids (krill); because of their only 1% of the estimated prey biomass, in the gut of
large size and swarming behavior, euphausiids are the hydromedusa P roboscidactyla fl avicirrata (Larson
important in the diet of many fi sh, seabirds and marine 1987 ). In the other fi ve hydromedusae investigated
mammals. Tintinnids are frequently found in the gut by Larson, tintinnids accounted for less than 1% of
contents of euphausiids including Euphausia pacifi ca , the recognizable prey (Table 5.4 ). Colin et al. (2005)

Predators of tintinnids 137
observed suspension feeding on microplankton by the against ciliates and diatoms relative to thecate dino-
small, cosmopolitan hydromedusa Aglaura hemis- fl agellates and euglenoid fl agellates. As in the case of
toma . Examination of preserved specimens revealed cnidarians, limited data suggest that aloricate ciliates
few items in the gut, but examination of live specimens are preferred over similar - sized tintinnids (Stoecker
showed that 100% contained unrecognizable protistan et al. 1987 ).
remains and about 20% contained tintinnids. Chaetognaths (arrow worms) are aggressive preda-
Among the larger scyphomedusae, at least fi ve tors on copepods and fi sh larvae in shelf, slope, and
species, including bloom forming species such as the oceanic waters. The adults do not feed on microzoo-
moon jelly ( Aurita aurita ), sea nettle ( Chrysaora quin- plankton, but young (stage I) of the chaetognath
quequecirrha ), and cannonball jelly (S tomolophus mela- Sagitta elegans prey on motile microplankton, including
gris ) consume tintinnids (Table 5.4 ). The cannonball tintinnids, as well as on copepods (Pearre 1973, 1981 ;
jelly is unusual among scyphomedusae in that it is Alvarez - Cadena 1993 ). Young chaeotognaths proba-
a small particle feeder. In natural prey assemblages, bly also prey on aloricate ciliates, but these would be
clearance by the cannonball jelly of tintinnids is higher unrecognizable in gut contents. The importance of pre-
than of copepods but lower than of veliger larvae of dation on tintinnids and other ciliates to survival and
mollusks. Tintinnids constituted 9% of the recogniza- growth of young chaetognaths is unknown.
ble items in the gut (Larson 1 991) . In feeding experi- Pelagic tunicates (salps, doliolids, and appendicu-
ments with the moon jelly, Aurita aurita , aloricate larians) are generalist ciliary mucous - net feeders
ciliates were selected over tintinnids (Stoecker et al. with high clearance rates for a wide range of particle
1987 ). Olesen et al. (1996) observed that ephyrae sizes. The appendicularians (larvaceans) have an
of the sea nettle, Chrysaora quinquecirrha , had higher incurrent fi lter on their house that limits ingestion of
clearance for an aloricate ciliate, Strobilidium , than for larger microplankton, which although cleared, are
tintinnids in natural assemblages. not ingested (Alldredge & Madin 1982 ; Vargas &
The cannonball jelly digests tintinnids more rapidly Gonzalez 2004 ). Thus, with the exception of the
than other recognizable prey (Larson 1991 ). This appendicularians, which do not ingest large micro-
observation, along with the feeding experiments plankton, the pelagic tunicates probably prey non -
showing that the feeding rate of jellyfi sh on aloricate selectively on nano - and microplankton, including
ciliates can be higher than on tintinnids, although tintinnids. Tintinnids have been observed in the guts
aloricate ciliates are not recognizable in gut contents, contents of salps, doliolids, and the appendicularian
suggests that the role of ciliates in the diet of jellyfi sh Oikopleura sp. (Table 5.4 ).
has been severely underestimated. It is possible tintin- The mucous - net feeding thecosome pteropod L imac-
nids, along with other microzooplankton, are impor- ina helicina is an important component of polar and
tant in the diets of both small and large medusae. subpolar planktonic food webs and is prey for zoo-
At high jellyfi sh densities, when jellyfi sh predation can planktivorous fi sh. In Arctic seas, it selectively feeds on
deplete copepod and other metazoan zooplankton pop- tintinnids and other motile zooplankton (Gilmer &
ulations, rapidly growing microzooplankton popula- Harbison 1991 ). During midsummer, tintinnids can
tions may be a “ maintenance ” diet prolonging jellyfi sh constitute 19% of the carbon in the gut of adult
blooms. L. helicina . However, in Antarctica, although both
Ctenophores (comb jellies) are another ecologically L. helicina and tintinnids are present, Hopkins (1987)
important group of gelatinous zooplankton, particu- did not observe tintinnids in the guts of net caught
larly in estuarine, shelf and slope waters. Both cydipid specimens.
and lobate ctenophores consume tintinnids (Table
5.4 ). Like the cnidarians, ctenophores are primarily
predators on copepods but ingestion of tintinnids and Other holoplankton
other microplankton may be important for newly
hatched tentaculate larvae, which are too delicate to The importance of tintinnids and other microzoo-
capture and ingest adult copepods without getting plankton in the diets of the less studied zooplankton
damaged (Stoecker et al. 1987 ; Sullivan & Gifford taxa is largely unknown. Rotifers, ostracods, and
2007 ). However, Sullivan & Gifford (2007) noted cladocera ingest tintinnids (Table 5.5 ). The estuarine
that newly hatched M memiopsis leidyi larvae selected cladoceran Evadne nordmanni captures and holds,

138 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
and presumably ingests, tintinnids (Bainbridge 1958 ). monly, tintinnids account for less than 25% of the
However, Sanchez et al. (2011) , in feeding experiments recognizable gut contents of larval fi sh (Govoni et al.
with plankton from a Chilean fjord, found that the 1983 ; Govoni & Chester 1990 ; Ogilvie 1938 ; Last
cladoceran Podon leuckarti did not ingest tintinnids and 1978a, b ; Jenkins 1987 ; Nagano et al. 2001 ; Stepien
other microplankton. 1976; Figueiredo et al. 2007 ; Sherman & Honey 1971 ;
Morote et al. 2008b; 2010 ; Watson & Davis 1989 ;
Arthur 1976 ; Llopiz & Cowen 2009 ). Because of the
Ichthyoplankton relatively small individual biomass of tintinnids, the
estimated biomass contribution of tintinnids to the diet
The diets of fi sh larvae are a topic of interest to fi sheries is usually much lower than the numerical contribu-
biologists because food limitation can be a signifi cant tion. For example, Grover ( 1998) estimated that tintin-
source of mortality to fi sh larvae in the fi rst few weeks nids contributed 29% of the numerical composition
of their lives (Hjort 1914 ; Lasker 1981 ; Turner 1984 ; but only 3% of the volumetric composition of the diet
von Herbing & Gallager 2000 ; Nagano et al. 2001 ; of prefl exion summer fl ounder larvae. In a mesocosm
Montagnes et al. 2010 ). Tintinnids, usually along with experiment in which tintinnids numerically accounted
thecate dinofl agellates, have long been recognized as for most of the prey in the guts of cod larvae, they
components of the gut contents of larval fi sh, par- accounted for less than 25% of the ingested biomass
ticularly fi rst - feeding or yolk - sac larvae of clupeids (van der Meeren & Naess 1993 ).
(anchovies, menhaden, herring, sardine), gadids (cod, Analyses of fi sh gut contents have focused on prey
haddock, whiting, bib), fl at fi sh (halibut, fl ounders, with hard parts that are resistant to digestion, such
dab, sole), sciaenids (spot, croaker), acanthurids (sur- as copepods and tintinnids; “ soft ” prey have gener-
geonfi sh), and the Ammondytidae (sand lances) (Table ally been ignored. A large proportion of the gut
5.6 ). Ingestion of tintinnids and other microplankton contents usually are not recognizable, consisting of
is important in initiating feeding. Once larval fi sh are mushy material (van der Meeren & Naess 1 993 ;
few days old, they start to capture and ingest copepods Govoni et al. 1983 ; Ohman et al. 1 991 ). Aloricate pro-
successfully. The occurrence of tintinnids in the gut tists, including choreotrich ciliates, turn to “ mush ”
usually drops drastically once the larvae start eating almost instantly in the gut (Ohman et al. 1991 ). In
copepods (Last 1978a, b ; Jenkins 1987 ; Nagano et al. most studies of larval gut contents, fi sh are preserved
2001 ; Stoecker & Govoni 1984 ; Van Der Meeren & with fi xatives that do not preserve ciliates well and the
Naess 1993 ; Fossum & Ellertsen 1994 ; Morote et al. gut contents are examined at relatively low magnifi ca-
2008a; 2010 ; Grover 1998 ; Gadomski & Boehlert tion; this has probably led to a severe underestimation
1984 ; Shaheen et al. 2004 ; Wittenrich et al. 2009 ). of ciliates in larval guts (Stoecker & Govoni 1984 ;
Observations of feeding on tintinnids based on gut con- Pierce & Turner 1992 ; Figueiredo et al. 2005 ; Mon-
tents have been confi rmed in laboratory experiments tagnes et al. 2010 ). Fukami et al. (1999) , using a com-
with fi rst - feeding gulf menhaden (Stoecker & Govoni bination of staining and epifl uorescence microscopy,
1984 ), convict grouper (Nagano et al. 2000 ), in meso- observed numerous aloricate ciliates and ciliate - like
cosm experiments with cod (Van Der Meeren & Naess cells in various stages of digestion in the gut contents
1993 ) and in rearing experiments with common snook of fi sh larvae collected in Japanese coastal waters. Pro-
(Wittenrich et al. 2 009 ). tists were abundant or moderately abundant in all but
The frequency of occurrence of tintinnids in the 9 out of 52 taxa of fi sh larvae, suggesting that they
guts of fi rst - feeding larvae is often very high, and are a component of the diet of most larval fi sh. Figue-
numerically, tintinnids can constitute a signifi cant pro- iredo et al. ( 2007) , using fi xatives appropriate for cili-
portion of the recognizable prey items. In a mesocosm ates, found aloricate ciliates in the guts of a variety fi sh
experiment, Van Der Meeren & Naess (1993) found larvae including spat, sand lance, dab, gobies, and cod
that tintinnids accounted for over 75% of the prey collected in the Irish Sea. With application of a correc-
items in the guts of cod larvae younger than 17 days tion factor to account for the rapid digestion of pro-
old. Nagano et al. (2001) reported that in fi rst - feeding tists, they estimated that protists constituted at least
Japanese sand lance, tintinnids were 78% of the prey 25% of the diets of six species of larval fi sh (Figueiredo
items in the gut. In both these instances tintinnid den- et al. 2005 ; Montagnes et al. 2010 ). Laboratory
sities in the water were unusually high. More com- feeding experiments support these fi ndings. Larvae of

Predators of tintinnids 139
the northern anchovy (E ngraulis mordax ) ingest cul- larvae (Montagnes et al. 2010 ). Nagano et al. (2001)
tured Strombidium sp. in laboratory experiments; at associated feeding of Japanese sand lance larvae on
high ciliate densities, the larvae can ingest ciliate aggregations of tintinnids with enhanced survival.
carbon equivalent to 85 – 95% of their body carbon per In laboratory experiments, presence of tintinnid prey
day (Ohman et al. 1991 ). First - feeding cod larvae pref- was associated with enhanced survival of fi rst - feeding
erentially ingested an aloricate ciliate, Balanion sp., grouper, Epinephelus septemfasciatus (Nagano et al.
over faster swimming, larger copepod nauplii in labo- 2000 ).
ratory experiments (von Herbing & Gallager 2000 ). It is worth noting that tintinnids and other ciliates
Flounder larvae ( Platichthys fl esus ) can consume hun- are likely a signifi cant component of fi sh food webs,
dreds of cultured E uplotes per hour (Figueiredo et al. beyond the stage of the fi rst- f eeding larvae. One of the
2007 ). fi rst attempts to depict a marine planktonic food web
In contrast to most zooplankton, fi sh larvae are was Alistair Hardy ’ s food web of the herring (Hardy
visual predators. Detection, capture, and ingestion of 1924 ). The web showed the wide variety of organisms
prey by larval fi sh depend on prey size, visibility con- eaten by the different life - history stages of herring as
trast, prey swimming patterns and escape responses well as the prey of the herring food items. Tintinnids
(Buskey et al. 1993 ). Although fi sh larvae will ingest were included as prey of small larvae. We now know
non - motile particles such as copepod eggs and large that tintinnids and other ciliates are probably of impor-
diatoms, they prefer motile prey. Abundance in larval tance to herring throughout its life directly or indi-
gut contents suggests they select motile protists (cili- rectly (Fig. 5.4 ).
ates and dinofl agellates) over non- m otile protists
(diatoms) (Figueiredo et al. 2007 ). In laboratory exper-
iments, menhaden larvae select the large tintinnid Larvae and adults of benthic invertebrates
Favella sp. over smaller dinofl agellates (Stoecker &
Govoni 1984 ). In the few fi eld studies in which alori- The meroplankton includes the larvae of many benthic
cate ciliates were included as well as tintinnids, data invertebrates. Diet and nutrition affect larval survival,
suggest that most fi sh larvae ingest more aloricate which in turn can affect benthic recruitment. Tintin-
ciliates (which are usually more abundant) but that nids are part of the diet of planktonic larvae of crabs,
tintinnids are observed in the guts despite their bryozoans and some worms (Table 5.7 ). Naidu (1983)
low abundances in the environment (Figueiredo et al. saw tintinnids in the guts of veliger larvae of mollusks.
2007 ). Among the aloricate ciliates, fi sh larvae seem However, most tintinnids are too big for veligers to
to prefer pigmented, mixotrophic ciliates to transpar- ingest. For example, veligers of the eastern oyster,
ent, heterotrophic ciliates, probably due to the greater Crassostrea virginica , can only ingest particles up to
visibility of the pigmented species (Figueiredo et al. about 30 μ m (Baldwin & Newell 1991 ) and thus only
2007 ; Van Der Meeren & Naess 1993 ). Although fi sh smaller tintinnids are probably consumed by most
larvae often ingest tintinnids with a hyaline lorica, larval mollusks.
such as Favella spp., they may preferentially prey on Suspension - feeding adult bivalves can clear tintin-
tintinnids with agluttinated loricae, such as Stenose- nids from the water column and then either ingest
mella spp., because loricae formed with mineral parti- them or deposit them in pseudo- f eces (Table 5.7 ).
cles may increase the visibility of the tintinnids to Feeding by dense beds of blue mussels (M ytilus edulis )
larvae (Govoni & Chester 1990 ). The preferences of and zebra mussels ( Dreissena polymorpha ) can signifi -
fi sh larvae for microplankton prey is complicated and cantly reduce populations of tintinnids in shallow
depends on prey size, visibility, movement, and prey waters (Horstad et al. 1988 ; Pace et al. 1998 ). Unfor-
escape responses as well as the experience of the fi sh tunately, because of the sampling methods used in
larvae (Govoni et al. 1983 ; von Herbing & Gallager these studies, there are no comparable data on removal
2000 ). of aloricate ciliates. However, in feeding experiments
Presence of tintinnids in the gut contents is an indi- with green shell mussels ( Perna canaliculus ), high clear-
cator of the important role of ciliates, in general, in ance of ciliates (primarily oligotrich ciliates) has been
the diets of fi sh - feeding fi sh larvae. Protists, including measured (Zeldis et al. 2 004 ). Direct comparisons of
tintinnids, appear to be a largely overlooked trophic bivalve grazing on tintinnids and aloricate ciliates are
link, and sometimes the primary food source for young not available.

140 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
7–12mm YOUNG 12–42mm HERRING 42–130mm
ADULT HERRING
Ammodytes
juv.
Medusae Pleurobrachia Tomopteris Sagitta Limacina Oikopleura
Semibalanus
Cumacea cypris Mysidacea Decapod Nyctiphanes Hyperiid
larvae larvae amphipods
Apherusa
mL oa llr uv sa cl a H ca orp pa ec pt oic do sid caP la ar na u- s P cs ae lau nd uo s- Acartia Temora C pe an gt ero s- Calanus
Podon
Evadne
Tintinnopsis Noctiluca Foraminifera
Radiolaria
Proro-
centrum Melosira Th oa sla irs asi- C -do is sc ci un so sR oh leiz no ia- C ch ea re ot so- Navicula
Peridinium Paralia Guinardia Biddulphia Nitzschia
Ceratium Phaeocystis
Fig. 5.4 The herring food web of Hardy (1924) showed the tintinnid T intinnopsis (shadowed box in lower left corner) as part
of the diet of small larval herring. Here the food web is re - drawn to show the organisms depicted by Hardy that are now
known to feed on tintinnids and probably other planktonic ciliates (black backgrounds). In the original fi gure the line
thickness denoted the importance of the link; the dashed lines denoted links based on the work from laboratories other than
that of Hardy, primarily that of LeBour.
Tintinnids are a component of the diet of micropha- of F. ehrenbergii and of aloricate ciliates was similar.
gous suspension feeders such as crinoids (feather stars) Stable isotope (N ) labeling of the prey showed that the
15
in shallow waters (Rutman & Fishelson 1969 ; La polyps assimilated nitrogen derived from the ciliates.
Touche & West 1980 ). Rutman & Fishelson (1969) Many suspension - feeding benthic invertebrates
found loricae of over 29 species of tintinnids in the probably consume tintinnids, but for most species
gut contents of crinoids from the Red Sea and 49% of there is little information on their rates of predation on
the recognizable gut contents were tintinnids or their microzooplankton. Most feeding experiments with
loricae. However, crinoids feed on detritus as well as benthic suspension feeders have been with phyto-
plankton, and empty loricae can persist in the detritus. plankton. However, similarly to the planktonic copep-
Much of the ingestion might have been of empty ods that have been studied, microzooplankton may be
loricae rather than intact tintinnids. The preservation qualitatively and quantitatively an important compo-
techniques used were not suitable for preservation of nent of the diet of benthic suspension feeders. There
intact ciliate cells. are some suggestions that tintinnids with heavy, agglu-
Benthic polyp stages of scyphomedusae ingest ciliates tinated loricae occur closer to the bottom than alori-
and other protists. Kamiyama (2011) observed feeding cate choreotrichs, and thus may be relatively more
by Aurelia aurita (moon jelly) polyps on ciliates, includ- available as prey to benthic suspension feeders (Rutman
ing the tintinnid F avella ehrenbergii . Clearance by polyps & Fishelson 1969 ).

Predators of tintinnids 141
5.3 ANTI-PREDATOR DEFENSES
OF TINTINNIDS
The lorica may partly protect tintinnids against some
types of predation. Many protistan predators consume
tintinnids but do not ingest the lorica; perhaps the pres- Publisher's Note:
ence of a lorica provides protection or increases han- Image not available
dling time, reducing predation effi ciency on tintinnids. in the electronic edition
Tintinnids do not have escape “ jumping ” responses
such as found in some aloricate ciliates such as Mesod-
inium , Halteria, and Strobilidium spp. However, tintin-
nids often become motionless for a short period in
response to disturbances, which may allow them to
escape detection by the predator or sink out of the
encounter zone of the predator (Broglio et al. 2001 ).
Fig. 5.5 Tintinnids appeared to be less subject to predation
Capriulo et al. ( 1982) calculated that the dense lorica
than aloricate ciliates such as aloricate choreotrichs and
of Stenosemella sp., agluttinated with mineral particles, Myrionecta rubra ( = Mesodinium rubrum ) by the cyclopoid
could allow the species to sink rapidly after distur- copepodOithona simulus , as shown in the results of
bance, decreasing predation by copepods. experiments with natural communities of ciliates. Error bars
S ome tintinnids, including Codonaria , Codonella , represent standard deviation. Figure from Nishibe et al.
Codonellopsis , Dityocysta , Salpingacantha, and Salping- (2010) with permission from the Plankton Society of Japan.
ella , possess a membranous apparatus that can close
the lorica opening in response to disturbance (Agatha
2010a ). It is possible that closure is protective (Bieder- D efense against gelatinous predators, such as cni-
mann 1893 and Daday 1 887, cited in Agatha 2 010a) darians and ctenophores, may be quite different from
and although not complete, might decrease release of defense against crustacean predators. Both medusae
chemical signals from the tintinnid that elicit responses and ctenophores appear to have much higher clear-
from the predator and thus might reduce successful ance rates for aloricate ciliates than for tintinnids
attacks (Agatha 2010a ). Unfortunately, there are no (Stoecker et al. 1 987a, b; Olesen et al. 1 996) . Medusae
behavioral observations of predator– p rey interactions and ctenophores sort prey from inert materials based
involving tintinnids with a lorica closing mechanism. on mechanical and chemical clues, with amino acids
T he lorica may also be somewhat effective as a post- and proteins stimulating feeding and particle retention
capture defense against predation by crustacean zoo- (Southward 1955 ). The non - living lorica, particularly
plankton. Copepods can, in some cases, ingest the one covered with mineral particles, may allow a pro-
tintinnid cell without ingesting the lorica, although in portion of the tintinnids to avoid triggering capture
other cases tintinnids appear to be ingested whole responses or may result in post - capture rejection. The
(Stoecker & Sanders 1 985; Tackx et al. 1 995; Robert- ctenophoreMnemiopsis tends to reject spiny polycheate
son 1983 ). In experiments with the tintinnid Metacylis larvae as prey; the acute shape of the posterior end of
sp. and the copepod Acartia clausi, Broglio et al. ( 2001) the lorica and spiny protrusions on some loricae may
observed that once captured by the copepod, the tintin- discourage predation as well (Stoecker et al. 1987 ).
nid was ingested 96% of the time, suggesting that for Behavioral responses of tintinnids to disturbance, ces-
this predator– p rey pair, the lorica is not an effective sation of swimming, withdrawal into the lorica, and,
post capture deterrent. Regardless of the precise mech- in some species, closure of the oral opening (Agatha
anisms involved, there is some evidence that tintin- 2010a ) may help to disguise tintinnids as inert particle
nids, compared with similar sized aloricate ciliates, to some gelatinous predators. Tintinnids are ingested
may be less subject to predation by copepods. Nishibe and digested by cnidarians and ctenophores, so these
et al. (2010) recorded lower clearance rates for potential defenses are, at best, only partly effective.
Oithona simulis feeding on tintinnids than either large A ttachment between the lorica and diatoms or other
or smaller aloricate ciliates in shipboard experiments surfaces may reduce predation risk. The association of
with natural communities (Fig. 5.5 ). Eutintinnus apertus and E . pinguis with spiny diatoms

142 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
(Chaetoceros spp.) is well known, but other tintinnid important (Chapter 6 ). The dominant predators on
taxa have also been observed physically associated planktonic ciliates in most marine ecosystems are
with large diatoms (Kofoid & Campbell 1939 ; Taylor copepods with predation pressure highest on the larger
1982 ; Gomez 2007 ). For example, S alpingella subconica ciliates. In temperate, coastal waters, Nielsen & Ki ør boe
forms associations with the ribbon - forming diatom (1994) estimated that the copepod community could
Fragilariopsis doliolus (Froneman et al. 1998 ). The tin- check growth of ciliates larger than 50 μ m year round
tinnid may benefi t from attachment to the diatom in but that copepod predation had only a moderate effect
several ways, including decreased susceptibility to pre- on smaller ciliates because of their rapid growth.
dation (Froneman et al. 1998 ; Gomez 2007 ). Attach- Calbet & Saiz (2005) estimated, based on global aver-
ment to diatoms may increase the effective size of the ages of ciliate abundance and copepod ingestion rates,
tintinnid and decrease its vulnerability to small size that adult copepod densities of approximately 7 l− 1
predators but perhaps increase risk from slightly larger would be required to reduce the ciliate standing stock
predators. Predation risk would depend on the preda- by 50% (mortality due to predation, or g , ∼ 0.7 d− 1 ).
tors present and their preferred prey size. The coastal Such high copepod densities are mostly restricted to
tintinnid Eutintinnus inquilinus attaches its lorica to copepod swarms in small areas and to highly produc-
solid surfaces, including suspended particles. E . inquili- tive coastal waters (Calbet & Saiz 2005 ). Assuming
nus is less susceptible to predation by copepods than is that clearance of copepods for tintinnids is similar to
a morphologically similar tintinnid that is entirely free those for ciliates in general, in most waters copepod
swimming (Jonsson et al. 2004 ). It seems likely that predation alone should not prevent the net growth of
attachment to diatoms or inert particles would also tintinnid populations. Predation pressure by copepods
decrease susceptibility of tintinnids to protistan preda- on ciliates is often highest near the end of phytoplank-
tors and some gelatinous predators. ton blooms when copepods are abundant, algae are
Some, but not all, species of tintinnids form cysts scarce but microzooplankton grazers are abundant, at
(Chapter 7) . Encystment may be both a strategy to these times predation may prevent net growth of cili-
survive unsuitable growth conditions and a way to ates (Stoecker & Sanders 1985 ; Stoecker and Egloff
avoid mortality due to predation (Reid 1987 ). Preda- 1987 ). Predation by copepods has a minor infl uence
tion and parasitism (Chapter 6 ) are thought to be the on ciliate standing stocks in many waters (Lonsdale
main causes of mortality in microzooplankton. Popu- et al. 2000 ; Nishibe et al. 2010 ; Broglio et al. 2004 ).
lations cannot withstand high rates of mortality when However, under other circumstances copepod preda-
the growth rate is low owing to unsuitable conditions. tion on ciliates can lead to trophic cascades, releasing
Cyst formation may be a way to maintain stable popu- phytoplankton from microzooplankton grazing pres-
lations during unfavorable conditions. sure (Stoecker & Sanders 1985 ; Irigoien et al. 2005 ;
Calbet & Saiz 2005 ; Reaugh et al. 2007 ; Nejstgaard
et al. 2001).
5.4 TOP-DOWN CONTROL OF TINTINNIDS Gelatinous zooplankton might exert top down
control on ciliates as many gelatinous zooplankton
There have been several studies of top - down control of can occur in dense swarms (Alldredge & Madin 1 982;
planktonic ciliate populations, but the focus has been Olesen et al. 1996 ). Although medusae and cteno-
on aloricate planktonic ciliates, because tintinnids phores consume tintinnids, they also exert top down
rarely dominate the ciliate assemblage. Maximum control on copepods, the net result may be that they
intrinsic growth rates ( r ) for tintinnids range from reduce predation on tintinnids and other microplank-
max
approximately 0.5 to 1.8 d− 1 (0.7 to 2.5 doublings d− 1 ) ton due to trophic cascading (Stoecker et al. 1987a,
(Chapter 4 ; also reviewed in Pierce & Turner 1992 ), b ). Planktonic sarcodines sometimes occur at high
but unless conditions are ideal, lower intrinsic growth densities in surface waters of tropical and subtropical
can be expected. Mortality (m ) due to predation, para- oceans; they may be signifi cant predators on tintin-
sitism, and other factors can reduce net growth rate nids and other ciliates in the open ocean. Most other
(K ), with K = r − m . In most planktonic ecosystems, planktonic predators, including fi sh larvae (Jenkins
predation is a major source of mortality for tintinnids 1987 ; Montagnes et al. 2010 ), probably have little
and other ciliates, although, particularly when tin- impact on tintinnid populations. However, in shallow
tinnid populations are dense, parasitism can also be waters, dense beds of benthic bivalves, owing to their

Predators of tintinnids 143
high clearance rates, can exert signifi cant top down low (Ohman & Runge 1994 ; Gifford & Dagg 1991 ).
control on tintinnids (Horstad et al. 1988 ; Pace et al. Globally, the contribution of ciliates to the diet of cope-
1998 ). pods is estimated to be approximately 30% of the daily
Although predation may seldom prevent the net ration (Calbet & Saiz 2005 ). Less is known about the
growth of tintinnid populations, it may be a major role of ciliates in the diet of other zooplankton and
factor in the evolution of tintinnids by selecting for almost nothing about their contribution to the diets of
lorica shape and size (Chapter 2 ) and in maintaining benthic suspension feeders. In addition to their quan-
tintinnid diversity (Chapter 10 ). In natural assem- titative signifi cance in the diet (carbon contribution),
blages, copepods often have the highest clearance rates ciliates, in general, may be qualitatively signifi cant as
for the most abundant tintinnid species (Dolan & Gal- high - quality food items. Inclusion of F avella sp. in the
legos 2001 ) or on medium - sized rather than small or diets of copepods boosts egg production (Stoecker &
large tintinnid species (Cariou et al. 1999 ). Copepod Egloff 1987 ). Ciliates often have lower C:N ratios and
predation can decrease the diversity of slow - growing are a better source of amino acids and proteins than
tintinnid assemblages, but increase the diversity of tin- phytoplankton and detritus (Stoecker & Capuzzo 1990 ;
tinnids in assemblages dominated by fast growing Gifford 1991 ). Metazoan zooplankton, benthic inver-
species (Dolan and Gallegos 2001) . Dolan et al. (2002) tebrates, and fi sh all require specifi c essential polyun-
observed that in the Mediterranean Sea, tintinnid saturated fatty acids, amino acids, and sterols in their
species richness, diversity of lorica diameters, and diet. Tintinnids and other microzooplankton are prob-
lorica lengths were not correlated with copepod abun- ably an important source of these essential nutrients
dance, suggesting that tintinnid diversity is more infl u- for suspension feeders (reviewed in Stoecker & Capuzzo
enced by resource diversity than predation. 1990 ; Sanders & Wickham 1993 ; Wickham 1995 ;
Broglio et al. 2003 ). However, fatty - acid profi les of cili-
ates vary with that of the prey they ingest. Broglio
5.5 IMPORTANCE OF TINTINNIDS AS PREY et al. (2003) found that in the copepod A cartia tonsa a
FOR THE PREDATOR mono - specifi c ciliate diet did not support higher egg
production effi ciency than mono - specifi c algal diets.
Although tintinnids occasionally “ bloom ” in coastal
waters or frontal areas, their abundance and biomass
are much less than those of oligotrichs and aloricate 5.6 TINTINNIDS AS VECTORS
choreotrichs and thus they are probably less important FOR ALGAL TOXINS
as prey than the aloricate ciliates (Chapter 9 ) (Pierce &
Turner 1992 ; Figueiredo et al. 2 009 ). An exception Large tintinnids, particularly Favella spp., are often
to this may be predators that appear to specialize on associated with dinofl agellate blooms. They can ingest
tintinnids such as some protistan predators, young toxic dinofl agellates including A lexandrium spp., which
chaetognaths, and fi rst - feeding fi sh larvae (Tables 5.1 – can contain paralytic shellfi sh poisoning (PSP) toxins,
5.6 ). However, in many cases apparent preference Dinophysis spp., which can contain okadaic acid
for tintinnids appears due to underestimation of (responsible for diarrheic shellfi sh poisoning), and
predation on aloricate ciliates and other soft - bodied small dinofl agellates that produce azaspiracids, which
microplankton. are polyether toxins implicated in shellfi sh poisoning in
Clearance rates of most zooplankton for ciliates, humans (see Maneiro et al. 2000 ; Kamiyama & Suzuki
including tintinnids, are usually higher than for co - 2006 ; Krock et al. 2009 ). Tintinnid predation may
occurring phytoplankton. This is partly because most help regulate toxic blooms, but tintinnids may be
ciliates are greater than 10 μ m in size, and thus in vectors of toxin transfer to higher trophic levels (White
the preferred prey size range of most suspension 1981 ). The PSP toxin content per unit biomass of
feeders, whereas in many environments the phyto- Favella taraikaensis cultured on A . tamarense is lower
plankton is dominated by cells less than 5 μ m in size, than that of their dinofl agellate prey, indicating that
which are too small to be effi ciently cleared by crusta- the tintinnids do not bio - magnify PSP (Kamiyama
cean grazers. Ciliates, including tintinnids, are quanti- & Suzuki 2006 ). F . taraikaensis rapidly excreted the
tatively important in the diet of copepods, especially ingested PSP, lowering the particulate toxin content of
when abundances of large - cell - size phytoplankton are the water.

144 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
However, tintinnids can be vectors for toxin transfer 2. Presence or absence of loricae in guts or fecal pellet
because one tintinnid can contain several ingested contents is not always a reliable indicator of predation
toxic cells. By repackaging the toxin into a larger, or lack of predation on tintinnids.
although less concentrated package, grazers that 3. One of the functions of the lorica appears to be as
might not ingest the dinofl agellate could be exposed a partial defense against predation. Predation on tin-
to the dinofl agellate toxin. PSP toxins can be found in tinnids appears to be lower than on similar - sized alori-
plankton size fractions containing tintinnids and het- cate ciliates. However, conclusive data are lacking.
erotrophic dinofl agellates, but few un- i ngested Alexan- 4. Under most circumstances, predation does not
drium cells (Turner et al. 2005 ). This could be important appear to prevent net growth of tintinnids. The excep-
in transfer of PSP toxins to fi sh larvae and copepods. tions to this include top - down control in coastal waters
Grazing experiments with F avella serrata during by high copepod populations and by dense beds of
blooms of Dinophysis acuminata , a dinofl agellate pro- bivalves in shallow waters.
ducing okadaic acid, have shown that the tintinnids 5. The presence of tintinnids in food vacuoles of pro-
ingest the toxic dinofl agellates and continue to grow tists, in gut contents of metazoa, and in fecal pellets is
(Maneiro et al. 2000 ). Okadaic acid content in seston an indicator of the general importance of planktonic
size fractions correlated positively with F . serrata , indi- ciliates in the diets of these organisms.
cating that the tintinnids could be a vector for toxin 6. Tintinnids, along with aloricate ciliates, may be sig-
transfer. As in the case of F avella and A lexandrium , nifi cant components in the diet of many suspension
there was no indication that the tintinnids biomagni- feeders usually categorized as grazers on phytoplank-
fi ed the toxins. ton and in the diet of fi rst - feeding larval fi sh.
In Scottish coastal waters, concentrations of aza-
piracids have been associated with plankton size frac-
tions containingFavella ehrenbergii. However, tintinnids ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
isolated from the tows and cultured on non - toxic dino-
fl agellates in the laboratory rapidly lost their azapiracid I thank Dr R.R.L. Guillard for introducing me to tintin-
content, indicating that the tintinnids were temporary nids by providing a sample of water containing live
vectors for the toxin (Krock et al. 2009 ). Favella , and then providing me with microalgae from
his wonderful collection of marine phytoplankton so
that I could try to culture them. His mentorship when
5.7 KEY POINTS I was a postdoctoral scholar many years ago fostered
my interest in the ecology and physiology of tintinnids
1. Tintinnids are prey for many zooplankton, and other ciliates and provided me with the tools to
suspension- feeding benthic invertebrates, and fi sh study them experimentally.
larvae. Most predators on tintinnids are omnivores.

Plate 1.1 Life - cycle stages in E utintinnus inquilinus . (a) A trophont (feeding stage) cell. (b) An early stage of binary fi ssion
showing the oral primordium (OP), which will develop into a new mouth. (c) The fi nal stage of cell division. (d) An early stage
of conjugation. (e) A conjugating pair showing a well - developed cytoplasmic bridge (CB) through which nuclear material will
be exchanged. Loricae are about 100 μ m long. Images are of Lugol ’ s - fi xed cells; sample from a mixed culture provided by
F. Lombard.
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Plate 1.4 Some tintinnid species with agglutinated loricae: T intinnopsis radix (a), T. campanula (b), T. dadayi (c), T. spiralis (d),
Codonella elongata covered with coccoliths (e), T intinnidium sp. (f), S tenosemella ventricosa (g), L eprotintinnus pellucidus (h), and
Codonellopsis schabi (i). Species names are attributed based on lorica morphology. All the specimens are Lugol ’ s - fi xed cells
except for Codonella elongata which was a live specimen.

Plate 1.5 Examples of tintinnid species with hyaline loricae: A mphorides quadrilineata (a), A mplectella collaria (b), C limacocylis
scalaria (c), Acanthostomella conicoides (d), P rotorhabdonella simplex (e), E piplocylis blanda (f), X ystonellopsis paradoxa (g),
Ormosella trachelium (h), Proplectella elipisoida (i), Dadayiella ganymedes (j), Dictyocysta lepida (k), Metacylis mediterranea (l),
Parafavella parumdentata (m), Parundella messinensis (n), A scampbellia tortulata (o), E utintinnus stramentus (p), Undella hyalina (q),
Helicostomella subulata (r), S alpingella acuminata (s), R habdonella spiralis (t), and C yttarocylis cassis (u). All the specimens are
Lugol ’ s - fi xed cells.

Plate 1.14 Tintinnids of Ernst Haeckel. Restored drawings from Ernst Haeckel ’ s 1873 paper, the fi rst scientifi c article
devoted to tintinnid ciliates. Image by J.R. Dolan.

Plate 1.15 “ La Boheme: A Portrait of Today ’ s Oceans in Peril ” , the 2012 sculpture by Mara G. Haseltine depicts two
tintinnids ensnarled in plastic. Dimensions: 91 cm × 122 cm × 185 cm (length × width × height). Materials: uranium - infused
blown glass and plastic. By permission of Mara Heseltine.

Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Plate 2.1 Scanning electron micrographs (left column) and EDX spectrograms (right column; adapted from Agatha & Simon
2012 ). After drying, the preserved loricae were coated with carbonate. The regions analyzed are marked by asterisks.
(a)Rhabdonella spiralis . (b) E utintinnus brandti . (c) C odonellopsis schabi . (d) C odonella aspera . (e) Tintinnopsis c f. cylindrica – Note
the presence of nitrogen in all loricae. Scale bars 200 μ m (a, b) and 50 μ m (c – e).

Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Plate 2.2 Loricae after mercuric bromophenol blue (a – f) and alcian blue stain (g – i); adapted from Agatha & Simon (2012) .
(a)Codonella aspera ; the staining is restricted to the lorica matrix, namely the embedded mineral particles are not colored.
(b)Eutintinnus brandti ; the lorica with its monolaminar and compact texture is uniformly stained. (c, d) C limacocylis species;
the alveolar texture of the lorica wall is well recognizable. (e, f) R habdonella spiralis showing the alveolar texture, the pores, and
the spiraled surface ridges. (g– i) Stenosemella ventricosa ; the lateral (g, h) and the oblique top (i) views show that the staining is
restricted to the bowl matrix, namely the mineral particles embedded in the bowl and the hyaline collar are not colored. Scale
bars 50 μ m (a, g – i), 200 μ m (b, c), 40 μ m (d), 100 μ m (e), and 20 μ m (f).

Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Plate 6.1 Euduboscquella cachoni from E utintinnus pectinis (adapted from Coats 1988 ). (a) Mid - infection showing trophont
nucleus containing a single large nucleolus (arrow). (b, c) A late trophont with well - developed perinema and lamina
pharyngea. (d) A recently formed tomont with ingested host cell relatively undigested. (e – h) Successive stages in sporogenesis.
Host nuclei (hn); food vacuole (fv); oral cilia of host (oc); parasite (p); parasite nucleus (pn); perinema (per); lamina pharyngea
(lp). Scale bar, 20 μ m.

Plate 6.2 Stages in vivo during the life cycle of E uduboscquella aspida from F avella panamensis (adapted from Coats et al.
1994 ). (a) Late trophont (arrow). (b) Tomont located posterior to host cell. (c) Four - cell state of sporogenesis. (d – f)
Progressively later stages in the development of beaded sporocytes. Food vacuole (fv); parasite nucleus (pn). Scale bar, 50 μ m).

Plate 6.3 Spores produced by E uduboscquella crenulata from Favella panamensis (adapted from Coats, D.W., Bachvaroff, T.R. &
Delwiche, C.F. ( 2012) Revision of the family Duboscquellidae with description of E uduboscquella crenulata n. gen., n. sp.
(Dinofl agellata, Syndinea), an intracellular parasite of the ciliate Favella panamensis Kofoid and Campbell, 1929 . Journal of
Eukaryotic Microbiology, 85, in press). (a) Sporocytes emerging from host lorica as beaded strings (scale bar, 50 μ m). (b)
Non - motile egg- shaped spores dispersing from host lorica (scale bar, 50 μ m). (c) Non - motile spherical spores in host loricae
(scale bar, 50 mm). (d – f) Dinokont, non - motile egg - shaped, and non - motile spherical spore, respectively Scale bars, 10 μ m;
arrows indicate spore nuclei.

Plate 6.4 Stages in the infection cycle of T intinnophagus acutus from T intinnopsis cylindrica (adapted from Coats, D.W., Kim, S.,
Bachvaroff, T.R., Handy, S.M. & Delwiche, C.F. (2010) T intinnophagus acutus n. g., n. sp. (Phylum Dinofl agellata), an
ectoparasite of the ciliate T intinnopsis cylindrica Daday 1887, and its relationship to D uboscquodinium collini Grass é 1952 .
Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, 57, 468 – 482). (a) Infective dinospore. (b – d) Growth of the trophont. (e – g) Sporogenesis.
(h) Outer membrane and nuclei of protargol - stained specimen entering second division. Dinospore nucleus with condensed
chromosomes (dn); eyespot (es); food vacuole (fv); host cell (h); outer membrane (om); parasite (p); parasite nucleus (pn);
sporocytes (s). Scale bars, 10 μ m (a, h), 40 μ m (b – g).

Plate 7.1 Photographs of tintinnid cysts from coastal waters of central and western Japan (from Kamiyama 1994b ).
(a)Tintinnopsis beriodea . (b) T intinnopsis sp. (c) T intinnopsis corniger . (d) Tintinnopsis kofoidi . (e) Favella taraikaensis . (f) E utintinnus
tubulosus . (g) H elicostomella subulata . (h) H elicostomella fusiformis . (i) Helicostomella longa . Scale bar, 50 μ m. Note that T . kofoidi
may be a synonym of T . cylindrica (Agatha & Reidel - Lorj é 2006 ).

Plate 7.2 Photographs of various fl ask - shaped cysts of marine ciliates (a – g) observed in sediments of northern Japan, and a
vegetative cell (h) of the oligotrich ciliate S trombidium chlorophilum identifi ed from protargol - stained cells and the cyst (i)
produced in a laboratory culture. Scale bars, 20 μ m (a – g), 50 μ m (h, i).

Plate 9.5 Differential interference contrast (left) and fl uorescence (right) images of a large tintinnid collected 40 km north of
Hawaii in 1983 by Mary Silver of the Unversity of California at Santa Cruz. Bright red autofl uorescent bodies (white in the
right panel), indicative of chlorophyll, were seen inside the tintinnid cell, and their distribution within the cytoplasm indicates
that they are not food vacuole contents. The shape of the lorica suggests that this is a member of the genus F avella or
Metacylis . For scale, the fi lament to the right of the tintinnid is a trichome of the cyanobacterium Trichodesmium sp., about
10 μ m in width. Image courtesy of Dr Mary Silver.

Plate 10.1 Examples of species with distributions restricted to high latitudes. Ptychocylis acuta (a) and
Parafavella parumdendata (b) are found only in Arctic and Subarctic waters while Laackmanniella prolongata
(c) andCymatocylisdrygalskii (d) are restricted to Antarctic waters.

Plate 10.2 The most commonly reported and widely distributed tintinnid species. A mphorides quadrilineata (a) specimen from
the Scripps Canyon area in the Pacifi c Ocean; D adayiella ganymedes (b) from the Indian Ocean collected during the Tara Oceans
Expedition;Eutintinnus apertus (c) and S teenstrupiella steenstrupii (d) both from the Bay of Villefranche in the N.W.
Mediterranean Sea; A canthostomella norvegica (e) from the Bering Sea. All specimens were preserved with Lugol ’ s solution.

Chapter 6
Parasites of
Tintinnids
D. Wayne Coats and Tsvetan R. Bachvaroff
Smithsonian Environmental Research Center, Edgewater, MD, USA
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
145

146 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
6.1 BACKGROUND ciliates typically succumb to their parasite and often
appear unable to reproduce; however, there are some
Heterotrophic symbionts of ciliates notable exceptions. Euplotespora binucleata , a micro-
sporidial parasite of Euplotes woodruffi , appears to have
Freshwater and marine ciliates host a diverse array little effect on its host, as infected and uninfected
of heterotrophic microbes including viruses, bacteria, cultures of the ciliate have comparable growth rates
fungi, and various protists (see Ball ( 1969) and (Fokin et al. 2008 ). In some host – parasite systems,
Lauckner (1980) for review of the early literature). complete recovery from parasitism seems possible.
Relationships between ciliates and their endo - and During stationary growth, the macronucleus of
ectosymbionts range from passive associations to Paramecium trichium is overtaken by Leptomonas kary-
mutualism and parasitism. True viral infections of cili- ophilus , resulting in death of the host. Under food -
ates are apparently unknown (Munn 2006 ), but cili- replete conditions, however, reproduction of the ciliate
ates can acquire viruses directly from the water via exceeded that of the parasite, resulting in some host
macropinocytosis (Pinheiro et al. 2007 ) or through cells devoid of parasites (Gillies & Hanson 1963 ).
ingestion of food items (Kucera 1992 ; Lobo - da - Cunha Resistance to parasitism can also differ across host
& Azevedo 1992 ). Ingested viruses can be deactivated strains. Leptomonas ciliatorum, a macronuclear parasite
by digestion (Pinheiro et al. 2008 ) or can persist, even of the hypotrich ciliate P araholosticha sterkii , had no
multiply, within the ciliate food vacuole to be released discernable effect on growth rate of its original host
in fecal pellets (Lauckner 1980 ). Thus, ciliates may act isolate, but killed a second host strain obtained from a
as passive vectors for the dispersal and transmission of different location (G ö rtz & Dieckmann 1987 ).
viral disease. Lifestyles of ciliate pathogens represent obligate
About 60 types of bacteria, many of which are likely intracellular parasites, typically free - living species
mutualistic (Vannini et al. 2003 ), are known to occur that are opportunistically endoparasitic, and extracel-
in the cytoplasm or nuclei of ciliates (Fokin et al. lular forms that could easily be considered predators,
2003 ). A striking example from the perspective of as they often feed gregariously, devouring the host
human health is the ability of pneumonia - causing from the outside. Indeed, some species once classifi ed
Legionella bacteria to live and reproduce in the cyto- as ectoparasites (e.g., Spiromonas gonderi ; Foissner &
plasm of T etrahymena , without apparent harm to the Foissner 1984) are now considered to be free - living,
ciliate (Fields et al. 1984 ; Barbaree et al. 1986 ; Steele micropredators of ciliates (Simpson & Patterson 1996 ).
& McLennan 1996 ). When ingested by Tetrahymena , The distinction between predatory and ectoparasitic
fecal pellets of virulent L . pneumophila are released relationships among protists is often diffi cult to assess,
from the ciliate and may contribute to the transmission particularly when dealing with species that kill and
of Legionnaires ’ disease (Berk et al. 2008 ). Some consume their host/prey on time scales of minutes to
endosymbiotic bacteria, however, clearly have negative hours. For well - studied groups like the heterotrophic
effects on their ciliate hosts. H olospora species that dinofl agellates, species fall along a predator - parasite
invade the micronucleus of Paramecium are an inter- continuum, with trophic classifi cation of intermediate
esting example, as they destroy the ciliate ’ s generative forms being rather arbitrary (Coats 1999 ). Gaines &
nucleus, thereby resulting in genetic castration (G ö rtz Elbr ä chter (1987) distinguished parasitic dinofl agel-
1988 ). Other bacterial symbionts have a more direct lates as species that have morphologically different
effect on ciliate survival, as they release toxins into feeding and reproductive stages and that produce more
the medium that kill sensitive individuals of the same than two daughter cells after each feeding event.
ciliate species or are transferred to sensitive cells during Because all but one parasite reported to infect tintin-
the sexual cycle of the host organisms (Verni et al. nids is a dinofl agellate, Gaines and Elbr ä chter ’ s defi ni-
1977 ; Heckmann 1983 ). tion is adopted here.
The wide assortment of protists that parasitize cili-
ates encompasses fungi (Foissner & Foissner 1986,
1995; Canter & Dick 1994 ), euglenoids (Schö nfeld Discovery of tintinnid parasites
1959 ), kinetoplastids (Wille et al. 1981 ; G ö rtz & Dieck-
mann 1987 ), dinofl agellates (Cachon & Cachon 1987 ), In samples from Messina, Italy, and the Canary Islands,
and even other ciliates (Canter et al. 1990 ). Infected Haeckel (1873) found small, spherical cells in the

Parasites of tintinnids 147
cytoplasm of two tintinnid species, C yttarocylis cassis Lohmann (1908) , a mentor of Laackmann, described
(reported as Dictyocysta cassis ) and Tintinnopsis cam- colorless, gymnodinoid macrospores that emerged
panula (reported as C odonella campanella ), interpreting from the lorica of tintinnids he identifi ed as Tintinnopsis
them to be ciliate reproductive propagules or spores nucula , but that Kofoid & Campbell (1939) considered
(note that tintinnid taxonomy used in this chapter to be Stenosemella nivalis . Lohmann recognized the
follows Kofoid & Campbell (1929, 1939) , with excep- parasitic nature of the spores arising from S . nivalis and
tions as adopted in Chapter 3 ). Haeckel ’ s spherical provided for them the name Gymnodinium tintinnicola.
spores (Fig. 6.1 a) are now considered the fi rst report Thus, Lohmann provided the fi rst formal description
of dinofl agellate parasitism in ciliates. Some years of a dinofl agellate parasitic on tintinnids. The mac-
later, Laackmann ( 1906, 1908) mistook parasitism rospores of G. tintinnicola (Fig. 6.1 f) were clearly dino-
of Tintinnopsis campanula and Coxliella helix (reported phycean, having a deep cingulum that separated the
as Cyttarocylis helix ; basionym: T intinnus helix Cla- anterior portion of the cell, the episome, from the pos-
par è de & Lachmann 1858 ) as sexual reproduction, terior portion, the hyposome, that was creased by a
reporting infections as “ sporocysts. ” His “ sporocysts ” well - defi ned sulcus. The two fl agella had a dinokont
of T . campanula were certainly an intracellular parasite arrangement, as they arose laterally on the cell, with
(Fig. 6.1 b) that emerged from the host to produce one transverse, beating in an undulating fashion
either spherical microspores or gymnodinoid mac- within the cingulum, and the other longitudinal,
rospores. By contrast, “ sporocysts ” of T. helix were extending posteriad from the juncture of the cingulum
clearly ectoparasites, as small individuals attached to and sulcus. For detailed consideration of dinofl agellate
the surface of the ciliate increased in size as the host morphology and structural terminology, the interested
became gradually smaller (Fig 6.1 c, d). The ectopara- reader is referred to Taylor (1987) .
site of T. helix eventually divided to produce gymnodi- Entz (1909b) encountered spores of a dinofl agellate
noid macrospores (Fig. 6.1 e) similar in appearance and that he considered to be a parasite of F avella ehrenber-
behavior to those Laackmann observed in T. campanula . gii (reported as C yttarocylis ehrenbergii ), but did not
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
(f)
hyp
m
h epi
tf
h
lf
p
p s
fv
fv
Fig. 6.1 Duboscquella tintinnicola and unnamed parasites mistaken as tintinnid reproductive stages. (a) Parasites in the
cytoplasm of C yttarocylis cassis (adapted from Haeckel 1873 ) . (b) Intracellular parasite of T intinnopsis campanula (adapted from
Laackmann 1 908 ) . (c – e) Extracellular parasite of T intinnus helix (adapted from Laackmann 1908 ) . (f) Macrospores of
Duboscquella ( Gymnodinium ) tintinnicola (adapted from Lohmann 1908 ) . Episome (epi); food vacuole (fv); host (h); hyposome
(hyp); longitudinal fl agellum (lf); mature macrospore (m); parasite (p); sporocytes, sporogenic division products preceding
spore formation, (s); transverse fl agellum (tf).

148 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Laackmann (1908) and Lohmann (1908) , the parasite
studied by Duboscq & Collin produced Oxyrrhis - like
macrospores that had a pointed anterior end, a rounded
posterior, and a pair of laterally placed fl agella with
one extending anteriad and the other wrapping loosely
around the cell.
Chatton (1920) created the genus Duboscquella to
include all the tintinnid parasites mentioned above. He
designated Duboscquella tintinnicola (Lohmann, 1908 )
Chatton, 1920 as the type species and accepted the
report of Duboscq & Collin (1910) as a redescription of
Gymnodinium tintinnicola, even though spore morphol-
ogy was not consistent with that reported by Lohmann
(1908) . Over the past 90 years, parasites resembling
the organism studied by Duboscq & Collin (1910) have
been reported as Duboscquella tintinni (Campbell 1927 ,
lapsus pennae for D uboscquella tintinnicola ), D ubosc-
quella tintinnicola (Hofker 1931) , and Duboscquella sp.
(Stoecker et al. 1983 ; Akselman & Santinelli 1989 ;
Agatha & Riedel - Lorj é 2006 ; Harada et al. 2007 ;
Konovalova 2007 ). In addition, seven other species
of Duboscquella have been described (Chatton 1952 ;
Cachon 1964 ; Coats 1988 ), four of which are intracel-
Fig. 6.2 Intracellular parasite of F avella ehrenbergii
(adapted from Chatton 1920 ) . Mature macrospore (m); lular parasites of tintinnids. Based on lifestyle and
nucleolus (n); parasite (p); last sporogenic division (arrow) lack of permanently condensed chromosomes in these
mistaken by Duboscq & Collin (1910) as gamete fusion. species, the genus Duboscquella has been placed in the
subphylum Syndinea. Recently, Coats et al. (2012)
used spore morphology and apparent ectoparasitic life-
style of Duboscquella tintinnicola to separate the species
provide illustrations or a species name. A year later, from other members of the genus D uboscquella , placing
Duboscq & Collin (1910) described what they inter- the latter in a new genus, Euduboscquella. Thus,
preted as sexual reproduction in an unnamed parasite Duboscquella tintinnicola now belongs to the subphylum
infecting F avella ehrenbergii. Although their account Dinokaryota as an ectoparasite of tintinnids, whereas
of the sexual cycle is likely erroneous (Cachon 1964 ), intracellular parasites previously included in Dubosc-
their observations and illustrations subsequently pub- quella remain in the subphylum Syndinea as species of
lished by Chatton (1920) provided important details Euduboscquella .
on the morphology of the parasite and its spores (Fig. Three other genera of parasitic dinofl agellates,
6.2 ). The actively growing parasite, the trophont, was Amoebophrya , Duboscquodinium , and Tintinnophagus ,
clearly intracellular and, except for the large central contain species that infect tintinnids: Amoebophrya
nucleolus, closely resembled Laackmann ’ s (1908) spo- tintinni is a syndinean parasite of X ystonella lohm-
rocyst of T . campanula (Fig. 6.1 b). Some specimens con- anni (Cachon 1964 ), whereas D uboscquodinium collini ,
tained several parasites similar to the report of Haeckel Duboscquodinium kofoidi , and T intinnophagus acutus are
(1873) , leading Duboscq and Collin to believe that spo- dinophycean parasites of E utintinnus fraknoii , Tintin-
rogenesis began inside the host, with further divisions nopsis campanula , and T intinnopsis cylindrica , respec-
outside the host resulting in spores. Because cell divi- tively (Chatton 1952 ; Coats et al. 2010 ). Lastly,
sion of the parasite inside the host cytoplasm was not Campbell (1926) described K aryoclastis tintinni (Fig.
observed, it is probable that Duboscq and Collin actu- 6.3 ) as a small ovoid parasite ( ∼ 1 μ m diameter) that
ally saw multiple infections of the host (Cachon 1964 ; reproduces by binary fi ssion, fi lling and eventually rup-
Coats et al. 1994 ), rather than intracellular sporogen- turing the macronuclei of its host, Stenosemella nivalis
esis. Unlike the dinophycean macrospores observed by (reported as Tintinnopsis nucula) . Subsequent accounts

Parasites of tintinnids 149
netic events associated with emergence of the parasite
from the host cell. Differences also exist in spore mor-
phology and diversity. Although both genera form
motile dinokont spores that have a poorly defi ned girdle
and sulcus, some species of E uduboscquella also produce
non - motile or weakly motile spores that apparently
lack fl agella or have a single fl agellum (see below).
Amoebophrya infections are established when the
dinospore actively penetrates the host cell membrane
(Fig. 6.4 ). The dinospore loses its fl agella when enter-
ing the host cytoplasm, but retains and replicates the
fl agellar basal bodies. As the basal bodies proliferate,
they form a spiraled row on the surface of the growing
trophont. With continued growth, the trophont takes
on a “ beehive ” appearance, with an elaborate cavity,
the mastigocoel, housing numerous fl agella that arise
from the spirally arranged basal bodies. At the end of
the infection cycle, the fl agella of the mature parasite
begin to move and the opening to the mastigocoel
expands outward, with the margin of the hyposome
moving backward away from the apex of the episome
(Fig. 6.4 ). As a result, the episome presses against and
Fig. 6.3 Karyoclastis tintinni infecting S tenosemella nivalis ruptures the host cell membrane, releasing the parasite
( from Campbell 1926 ) . Parasites (p) are emerging from the vermiform into the surrounding water. The motile ver-
anterior of the two host macronuclei (ma). miform is an ephemeral multinucleate, multifl agellate
stage that quickly increases in length and soon frag-
ments to form dinospores. The duration of the infection
cycle is unknown for A . tintinni , but ranges from two
of K. tintinni , or organisms resembling it, are very to four days in other species (Park et al. 2004 ).
limited (Campbell 1927 ; Hada 1932a ), with Cachon Cachon (1964) and Cachon & Cachon (1987)
(1964) concluding that Campbell (1926) mistook describe formation of the “ beehive ” stage by expansion
“ enclaves resulting from the metabolism of the ciliate ” of the trophont hyposome to enclose the episome,
(translated from the original French) as parasitism. except for the narrow opening leading to the mastigo-
coel (Fig. 6.4 ). That pattern, however, does not appear
to be consistent across all species, as a recent ultrastruc-
6.2 DINOFLAGELLATE PARASITES: tural study of A moebophrya sp. from the dinofl agellate
MORPHOLOGY AND INFECTION CYCLE Akashiwo sanguinea (Miller et al. 2012 ) shows the mas-
tigocoel forming as a closed cavity within the trophont
Syndinean parasites cytoplasm. The mastigocoel of A moebophrya sp. from A .
sanguinea does not open to the host cytoplasm until late
Six species representing two genera of syndinean dino- in the infection cycle. Nuclear development also differs
fl agellates (subphylum Syndinea Corliss, 1984) are among Amoebophrya species, with some undergoing
intracellular parasites of tintinnids: Amoebophrya tin- nuclear division along with growth of the trophont,
tinni , Euduboscquella anisospora , E . aspida , E. cachoni , polyenergide development, whereas others show
E. cnemata , and E. crenulata (Chatton 1920 ; Cachon nuclear enlargement and delayed fi ssion, synenergide
1964 ; Coats 1988 ; Coats et al. 2012 ). The two genera development (Fig. 6.5 a,b). Cachon (1964) reported
have similar life cycles, with infections directly trans- both forms of nuclear development in A . t intinni ,
mitted to new hosts by spores, but show marked diver- with nuclear fi ssion along with trophont growth being
gence in trophont development, timing of nuclear most common. Whether synenergide or polyenergide
division relative to the infection cycle, and morphoge- in development, the mature “ beehive ” of A . tintinni is

150 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 6.4 Generalized infection cycle for A moebophrya (adapted from Cachon, J. & Cachon, M. ( 1987 ) Parasitic dinofl agellates.
The Biology of Dinofl agellates (ed. F.J.R. Taylor), pp. 571 – 610. Blackwell, Oxford). Dinospore and vermiform stages are free
swimming in the aqueous environment. Trophont stages, including the “ beehive ” , reside in the host cytoplasm or nucleus.
multinucleate, with the nuclei underlying the helically but hinders reproduction of some host species. When
arranged basal bodies (Fig. 6.5 c). Nutrition of the tro- infected by E . cachoni , Eutintinnus pectinis appears
phont likely involves osmotrophy, but ingestion of host unable to divide and succumbs to parasitism, while
material through a microtubule- l ined cytopharynx is Favella panamensis parasitized by E. aspida repro-
also probable (Cachon 1964 ; Miller et al. 2012 ). duces normally and sometimes survives the infection
Infection of tintinnids by E uduboscquella species (Cachon 1964 ; Coats 1988 ; Coats et al. 1994 ). Esti-
appears to be a passive process. Cachon (1964) inocu- mates for the duration of the infection cycle range
lated natural populations of tintinnids with spores of from 0.75 to 4 days. Sporogenesis lasts another 0.25 – 3
E. aspida , maintaining non - inoculated samples as con- days, depending on environmental conditions and the
trols. After incubation for 24 hours, the infection rate host – parasite system under study (Cachon 1964 ;
was three times higher in the inoculated samples, and Coats 1988 ; Coats et al. 1994) .
recently established trophonts were located near the Trophonts of E uduboscquella species are subspherical
host cytostome, leading to the conclusion that infec- to irregular in shape, have a synenergide nucleus, and
tions are transmitted when the host ingests, but fails grow into a large, often slightly yellow mass that fi lls
to digest spores of Euduboscquella . Parasitism has little much of the host cytoplasm. During growth, the
infl uence on tintinnid swimming and feeding behavior, episome becomes defi ned on the surface of the parasite

Parasites of tintinnids 151
Fig. 6.5 Nuclear development in A moebophrya species. (a) A kashiwo sanguinea infected by a polyenergide species of
Amoebophrya . (b) Synenergide trophont of A moebophrya tintinni in F avella panamensis. (c) Beehive stage of A moebophrya tintinni
inFavella panamensis . Host nucleus (hn); mastigocoel (mas); parasite (p); parasite nucleus (pn). Scale bars, 10 μ m. Previously
unpublished micrographs provided by D.W. Coats.
as a circular region having a rigid appearance and a process. The post - feeding cell, or tomont, partly digests
fl attened to slightly convex profi le (Fig. 6.6 and Plate host material contained in the food vacuole before
6.1 ). In mid - to late infections, the rigid, episomal undergoing palintomy, serial nuclear and cytoplasmic
surface, or shield, of maturing parasite is creased by divisions without interruption until spores are formed.
one or more grooves, the arrangement of which is Sporogenesis of Euduboscquella species follows one of
often species- specifi c (Table 6.1 ). Bordering the shield three patterns (Cachon 1964 ; Coats 1988 ; Coats et al.
is a fi brous, contractile annulus, the perinema, from 2012 ). In E. cachoni , palintomy produces tightly packed
which arises a microtubular tube, the lamina pharyn- daughter cells, sporocytes, (pattern 1; Fig. 6.6 and
gea (Fig. 6.7 ). The trophont appears to feed by osmo- Plate 6.1 ) that separate only after the fi nal sporogenic
trophy (Cachon 1964 ), but ingestion of host material division to produce either dinokont or non - dinokont
through the lamina pharyngea, as noted in Amoebo- spores. In E. aspida , E. crenulata , and E. cnemata , the
phrya , is a distinct possibility. Emergence of the mature fi rst four to fi ve divisions yield sporocytes that are
trophont from the host cell involves dramatic invagina- linked together like a string of beads, with subsequent
tion of the hyposome, expansion of the episome, and division elaborating very long strings of sporocytes
contraction of the perinema to form a food vacuole that mature as dinokont spores (pattern 2; Fig. 6.8 and
enclosing all (Fig. 6.6 ) or part (Fig. 6.8 ) of the host cell. Plates 6.2 and 6.3 ) or producing loosely clustered spo-
Although the function of the lamina pharyngea is rocytes that mature as non - dinokont spores (pattern 3;
uncertain, Cachon (1964) believed that it facilitated Plate 6.3 ). Sporogenesis of E. anisospora is not well
the ingestion of host remains during the emergence described, but fi gures provided by Grass é (1952, in

152 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 6.1 Host taxa and morphological attributes of E uduboscquella species that infect tintinnids (see text for consideration
of sporogenic patterns).
Parasite Host species Trophont Sporogenesis Spores
E. aspida Favella spp. Shield with sagittal Pattern 2 Two types: reniform, highly motile
Coxliella groove, underlain by and 3 dinokont spores, 4– 7μm long,
laciniosa crisscrossing fi bers; numbering∼1000; weakly motile
Tintinnopsis single large non-dinokont spores with rounded
campanula nucleolus episome and pointed hyposome,
Eutintinnus 2–3μm long, numbering over
fraknoii 50000
E. anisospora Favella sp. Shield with 6– 7 nearly Appears to Two types: highly motile dinokont
parallel grooves; follow spores with bulbous episome and
single large pattern 3 narrow hyposome; two distinct
nucleolus sizes: 20 μm and 12.5 μm long
E. cachoni Eutintinnus Shield with sagittal Pattern 1 Three types: highly motile dinokont
pectinis groove; single large spores with bulbous episome and
Eutintinnus nucleolus narrow hyposome, 5– 8μm long,
tenuis number∼50; spherical, weakly
motile mono- fl agellated spores,
2–3μm diam., numbering∼500;
non-motile spindle- shaped spores,
4–8μm long, numbering∼600
E. cnemata Favella 20–30 grooves curving Appears to One type reported: reniform
ehrenbergii out from the center follow dinokont spores, 3– 4μm long
of the shield; single Pattern 2
large nucleolus
E. crenulata Favella Numerous intertwining Pattern 2 Three types: highly motile sigmoidal
panamensis grooves, multiple and 3 dinokont spores, 7– 10μm long,
nucleoli distributed several hundred in number;
peripherally non-motile spherical spores,
10–12μm diameter, numbering
100–200; non -motile egg- shaped
spores, 10– 16μm long; 100– 200 in
number
Chatton 1952 ) appear to follow pattern 2. Although a problematic, as the highly motile dinokont spores of E .
given parasite follows only one of these patterns, a host crenulata are smaller than the parasite ’ s non - motile
organism with more than one infection may have para- spores (Coats et al. 2012 ). Thus, the macrospore –
sites that display different patterns. microspore dichotomy of the older literature is aban-
Euduboscquella species, other than E . cnemata , doned in subsequent discussion.
produce at least two types of spore that differ in size, Cachon (1964) reported only dinokont spores for
shape, and sometimes motility (Table 6.1 ). Historically, E. cnemata , but recognized that his observations were
highly motile dinokont spores were called mac- insuffi cient to exclude the possibility of other spore
rospores, whereas smaller, often weakly motile spores morphologies. Euduboscquella anisospora and E . aspida
were termed microspores (Chatton 1952 ; Cachon form large and small fl agellated spores (Fig. 6.9 ). In
1964 ; Coats 1988 ). That terminology has become E. anisospora , both sizes are highly motile, clearly

Parasites of tintinnids 153
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 6.6 Stages in the infection cycle of E uduboscquella cachoni from E utintinnus pectinis (adapted from Coats 1988 ) . (a – c)
Growth of parasite trophont in host cytoplasm. (d) Emergence of parasite from host cell. (e) Parasite tomont with remains of
host cell enclosed in a food vacuole. (f – h) Palintomic sporogenesis leading to tightly packed sporocytes and release of spores.
Host nucleus (hn); parasite (p); parasite nucleus (pn); perinema (per); food vacuole (fv); shield (s).
Fig. 6.7 Transmission electron micrographs of E uduboscquella cachoni from E utintinnus pectinis showing position and
structure of the lamina pharyngea. (a) Cross - section of parasite at level of the lamina pharyngea; scale bar, 1 μ m.
(b) Enlargement showing microtubular structure of lamina pharyngea; scale bar, 200 nm. Host mitochondria (hm);
lamina pharyngea (lp); host lorica (lor); parasite episome (epi); parasite hyposome (hyp); parasite nucleus (pn);
parasitophorous vacuole (pv); perinema (per). Previously unpublished micrographs provided by D.W. Coats.

154 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 6.8 Stages in the infection cycle of E uduboscquella aspida from F avella ehrenbergii (adapted from Cachon, J. & Cachon, M.
( 1987 ) Parasitic dinofl agellates. The Biology of Dinofl agellates (ed. F.J.R. Taylor), pp. 571–610. Blackwell, Oxford). (a) Parasite
emerging from host cell. (b – d) Palintomy leading to beaded sporocytes. Host cell (h); parasite nucleus (pn); food vacuole (fv);
sporocytes (s).
dinokont, and have a bulbous episome above a nar-
rower, cylindrical hyposome. The large spores of
E. aspida are reniform and clearly dinokont, whereas
its smaller spores have a rounded episome, pointed
hyposome, and do not appear to be dinokont. Indeed,
Cachon ( 1964) was not certain that the small spores
of E. aspida were bifl agellated, remarking that “ the
abrupt movements of the protist can only be explained
by the action of a second fl agellum that remains
pressed against the cell body at rest, but we weren ’ t
able to see it in the living specimen; however, Mann’ s
Publisher's Note: Publisher's Note:
staining allowed us to see, near the blepharoplast, a
Image not available Image not available
thin transverse strand that could be a fl agellum ” (trans- in the electronic edition in the electronic edition
lated from original French). Euduboscquella cachoni and
E. crenulata each form three types of spores, but spore
morphologies differ considerably between the two
species (Coats 1 988; Coats et al. 2 012) . Spores of E.
cachoni include highly motile dinokont cells resem-
bling those of E . anisospora , small spherical cells with
a single fl agellum, and non - motile, spindle - shaped cells
that may represent cysts (Fig. 6.10 ). By contrast,
Fig. 6.9 Large and small fl agellated spores of
E. crenulata forms sigmoid dinokont spores, non- m otile
Euduboscquella aspida (a, b, respectively) and E uduboscquella
spherical spores, and non - motile egg - shaped spores
anisospora (c, d, respectively). Left scale bar for E . aspida
(Plate 6.3 ). Euduboscquella species, other than E . ani- spores, 5 μ m. Right scale bar for E . anisospora spores, 20 μ m.
sospora, release only one type of spore from each infec- (a, b) Redrawn from Cachon (1964) . (c, d) Adapted from
tion, but more than one kind of spore may be produced Chatton (1952) .

Parasites of tintinnids 155
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 6.10 Spore produced by E uduboscquella cachoni from E utintinnus pectinis (adapted from Coats 1988 ) . (a – c) Highly
motile dinokont spores, weakly motile non - dinokont spores, and cyst - like spores, respectively, emerging from host lorica.
(d, e) Scanning electron micrographs of dinokont and non - dinokont spores, respectively. Episome (epi); hyposome (hyp);
longitudinal fl agellum (lf); transverse fl agellum (tf); mastigonemes (arrowhead). Scale bar, 20 m for (a – c); 5 μ m for (d); 1 μ m
for (e).
from a host having multiple infections. E. anisospora Dinophyceae Pascher, 1914) are parasites of tintinnids
differs as it apparently forms large and small dinokont (Chatton 1952 ; Coats et al. 2010, 2012 ). Duboscquella
spores from the same infection (Chatton 1952 ). tintinnicola , Duboscquodinium collini , and T intinnopha-
gus acutus are, or appear to be, ectoparasitic, whereas
the lifestyle of Duboscquodinium kofoidi is unknown. T.
Dinophycean parasites acutus infections are actively transmitted to new hosts
by highly motile, predator - like dinospores, with infec-
Four species representing three dinophycean genera tions of the other species presumably propagated in
(subphylum Dinokaryota Fensome et al., 1 993; class the same manner. The dinospores of Duboscquodinium

156 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 6.2 Host taxa and morphological attributes of dinophycean species that infect tintinnids.
Parasite Host Tomont Sporogenesis Spores
species
Duboscquella Stenosemella Without double First division not Athecate (?) with
tintinnicola nivalis outer wall or differential; sporocytes rounded episome,
membrane; without double outer 17–20μm long by
food vacuole wall or membrane 10–12μm wide; lacking
fi lling most conspicuous eyespot;
of cell numbering 10– 24
Duboscquodinium Eutintinnus With double First division differential, Gymnodinoid; 16 in
collini fraknoii outer wall or forming trophocyte number
membrane; and gametocyte;
dinokaryotic sporocytes leave outer
wall or membrane
Duboscquodinium Tintinnopsis Without double First division not Gymnodinoid
kofoidi campanula outer wall or differential; sporocytes
membrane forming rose- shaped
aggregate without
double outer wall or
membrane
Tintinnophagus Tintinnopsis Without double First division not Weakly thecate with
acutus cylindrica outer wall or differential; sporocytes pointed episome and
membrane; with double outer wall conspicuous
dinokaryotic; or membrane eyespot;13–16μm long
small food by 9 –12μm wide;
vacuole numbering 18– 46
collini and D uboscquodinium kofoidi are not well charac- a second outer membrane or cyst wall around the
terized, but those of Duboscquella tintinnicola and T. tomont, and forms dinospores having a rounded
acutus are unmistakably dinophycean, having a clearly episome, but no conspicuous eyespot. The last two
defi ned girdle that cradles the transverse fl agellum attributes distinguish D uboscquella tintinnicola from
and a distinct sulcus with longitudinal fl agellum. All T. acutus . In addition, Duboscquella tintinnicola com-
four species are presumably dinokaryotic, but that pletes sporogenesis without forming a degenerative
condition has only been confi rmed for D uboscquodin- trophocyte or a “ rosace ” confi guration of sporocytes,
ium collini and T. acutus . Except for T . acutus , trophont features characteristic of D uboscquodinium species.
morphology is poorly characterized or unknown. As described by Grass é (in Chatton 1952 ), the
Thus, dinophycean parasites of tintinnids are largely tomont of Duboscquodinium collini has a double outer
distinguished by features of their post - feeding stages membrane and dinokaryotic nucleus, with the fi rst
(Table 6.2 ). division forming a gametocyte and a trophocyte (Fig.
Duboscquella tintinnicola and Duboscquodinium kofoidi 6.11 a, b). The gametocyte continues to divide, produc-
have not been reported since their original descrip- ing sporocytes that emerge from the outer membrane
tions, whereas Duboscquodinium collini was recently to become gymnodinoid dinospores, while the tro-
rediscovered, but not fully characterized (Coats et al. phocyte receives the partly digested food vacuole, fails
2010 ; J. Dolan, unpublished observations). In review- to divide, and eventually degenerates. Recent examina-
ing the early literature, Coats et al. (2012) concluded tion of D uboscquodinium collini from the Mediterranean
that Duboscquella tintinnicola is ectoparasitic, lacks Sea (Coats et al. 2010 ) confi rmed morphological fea-

Parasites of tintinnids 157
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Figue 6.11 Duboscquodinium collini from E utintinnus fraknoii . (a, b) Tomont and sporogenic stages, respectively (adapted from
Chatton 1952 ) . (c) Tomont from the Mediterranean Sea showing noticeable protuberance (arrow) in outer membrane; from
Coats, D.W., Kim, S., Bachvaroff, T.R., Handy, S.M. & Delwiche, C.F. (2010) T intinnophagus acutus n. g., n. sp. (Phylum
Dinofl agellata), an ectoparasite of the ciliate Tintinnopsis cylindrica Daday 1887 , and its relationship to D uboscquodinium collini
Grass é 1952 . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, 57, 468 – 482 . (d, e) Trophont feeding on host cell and sporocytes emerging
from outer membrane, respectively. Note protuberance in outer membrane (arrows). Previously unpublished images of Lugol ’ s
preserved specimens from 50 m at a station (32 ° 41′ S, 84 ° 04 ′ W) in the southeastern Pacifi c Ocean; images courtesy of J.
Dolan. Food vacuole (fv); outer membrane (om); parasite nucleus (pn); sporocytes (s); trophocyte (tc). Scale bars, 25 μ m.
tures described by Grass é , but showed a distinctive pro-
tuberance in the outer membrane of the trophont that
was consistently directed toward the oral opening of
the host lorica (Fig 6 .11c ). Specimens from the south-
east Pacifi c (J. Dolan, unpublished observations) also
had a distinctive protuberance in the outer membrane Publisher's Note:
and appeared to be feeding on the host cell (Fig. 6.11 d), Image not available
supporting the notion that Duboscquodinium collini in the electronic edition
is an ectoparasite. Sporocytes from Dolan’ s samples
appeared to emerge from the outer membrane of the
tomont before maturing into dinospores (Fig. 6.11 e),
further supporting Grass é ’ s observations.
Grass é (in Chatton 1952 ) tentatively assigned a
second species to the genus Duboscquodinium , provid- Fig. 6.12 Duboscquodinium kofoidi from T intinnopsis
ing the name Duboscquodinium (?) kofoidi (Fig. 6.12 ). campanula . (a) Tomont without double outer membrane.
(b) “ Rosace - stage ” of sporogenesis. (c) Sporocytes
Grass é appears to have aligned D uboscquodinium kofoidi
differentiating into gymnodinoid dinospores. Adapted from
withDuboscquodinium collini , as both species form gym-
Chatton (1952) .
nodinoid dinospores.Duboscquodinium kofoidi , however,
differs from Duboscquodinium collini by the absence
of a double outer membrane and the formation of an
unusual “ rosace ” stage during sporogenesis. Were it

158 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
not for this “ rosace ” stage, D uboscquodinium kofoidi slide, however, the paired cells rounded into a mass
would be indistinguishable from the sporocysts found and degenerated. Thus, it seems likely that Duboscq &
by Laackmann (1908) in the loricae of T intinnus helix Collin (1910) mistook the fi nal division of fl agellated
and now considered to be Duboscquella tintinnicola spores as gamete fusion.
(Coats et al. 2012 ). Should future studies establish Sexuality involving fusion of motile anisospores has
synonymy of Duboscquella tintinnicola and D uboscquo- been reported for the tintinnid parasite Euduboscquella
dinium kofoidi , then the latter would fall as a junior anisospora by Grass é (in Chatton 1952 ) and for C oc-
synonym. cidinium mesnili , a syndinean parasite of dinofl agel-
Tintinnophagus acutus is by far the most completely lates (Chatton & Biecheler 1936 ). According to Grass é ,
characterized dinophycean parasite of tintinnids. Its spores of E. anisospora produced inside the same host
dinospores appear weakly thecate, have a sharply lorica paired in various orientations, lost their fl agella,
pointed episome, large nucleus with condensed chro- and fused to form a zygote. Illustrations were not
mosomes, and a conspicuous eyespot (Plate 6.4 ). After provided, and the fate of the presumptive zygote was
entering the host lorica,T. acutus attaches posteriorly not determined, leaving uncertain whether Grass é
on the tintinnid zooid via a feeding tube and forms a had actually observed part of a sexual cycle. Chatton
spherical trophont without fl agella, girdle, and sulcus. & Biecheler ’ s (1936) account of sexuality in C . mesnili
The trophont ingests host material through a feeding is more convincing, as the authors provided illustra-
tube and grows slowly, with more than a 50- f old tions (Fig. 6.13 ) and a time - frame for gamete fusion.
increase in volume over 4 days. During that time, the Small capped (c - type) and rostrate (r - type) spores
nucleus becomes quite large, presumably synenergide, coupled perpendicularly at their fl agellar bases and
and a small, typically reddish food vacuole forms at became motionless as fusion progressed. Fusion lasted
the anterior end of the parasite. Sporogenesis is palin- about 5 min, occurring fi rst in the hyposome region,
tomic, but prolonged, requiring 2 days to produce with fl agella of both spores being retained. The result-
mature dinospores. Sporocytes, but not the tomont, ing quadrifl agellate zygote regained motility, but subse-
are encased in a second outer membrane or cyst wall. quent development was not determined. Coccidinium is
Host cells generally survive infection, but show aber- a problematic genus known only from the original
rant nuclear morphology and appear unable to repro- species descriptions. Early developmental stages closely
duce (Coats et al. 2010 ). resembleAmoebophrya and D uboscquella , with charac-
terization of the genus Coccidinium possibly based on
the inadvertent combination of features from several
Sexuality unrelated organisms (Loeblich III 1982 ; Fensome et al.
1993 ). Thus, the relevance of the sexual cycle reported
A sexual cycle, often encompassing formation of forC. mesnili is diffi cult to assess. Interestingly, however,
resting cysts, is well documented among members of several strains of Amoebophrya have been maintained
the Dinokaryota, but has yet to be reported for dino- in culture, apparently without undergoing a sexual
phycean species that parasitize tintinnids (Pfi ester & cycle (Park et al. 2004 ).
Anderson 1987 ; Anderson et al. 1998 ). By contrast, Most recently, Coats et al. (2012) described sexuality
sexuality has been implicated in only three syndinean involving two of the three spore types formed by E udu-
species, two of which are parasites of tintinnids. As
mentioned earlier, Duboscq & Collin (1910) observed
paired fl agellated spores in an unidentifi ed parasite
of F avella ehrenbergii , interpreting them to be fusing
gametes (Fig. 6.2 ). The paired spores were of equal size
and shape (isospores), lost their fl agella, and rounded
into a mass, presumably a zygote, but subsequent
development was not followed. Cachon (1964) was
unable to repeat the observations of Duboscq and
Collin, fi nding instead that paired isospores resulted Fig. 6.13 (a – c) Fusion of C occidinium mesnili spores to
from sporogenic fi ssion and always separated when form (d) a motile, quadrifl agellate zygote (adapted from
maintained in a dish. When placed on a microscope Chatton & Biecheler 1936 ) .

Parasites of tintinnids 159
boscquella crenulata (Fig. 6.14 ). Small dinokont spores undergoing meiosis, to produce four daughter cells
paired with non - motile spherical spores to form similar in appearance to the non - motile egg - shaped
non - motile zygotes, but did not respond to non - motile spores of E. crenulata .
egg - shaped spores. Fusion of the spores, or more Taken together, these observations strongly support
appropriately the gametes, required about 20 min the existence of a sexual cycle in syndinean dinofl agel-
and was accompanied by nuclear fusion and fl agellar lates in general and particularly in species that infect
resorption. The non - motile zygote remained quiescent tintinnids. What remains unclear is the ability of the
for about 2 hours and then divided twice, presumably various extracellular life - history stages to initiate new
Fig. 6.14 Sexual processes in the life cycle of E uduboscquella crenulata from F avella panamensis (adapted from Coats, D.W.,
Bachvaroff, T.R. & Delwiche, C.F. ( 2012) Revision of the family Duboscquellidae with description of E uduboscquella crenulata n.
gen., n. sp. (Dinofl agellata, Syndinea), an intracellular parasite of the ciliate F avella panamensis Kofoid and Campbell, 1929 .
Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, 85, in press). (a – d) Fusion of motile dinokont and non - motile spherical spores. Arrows
indicate partly resorbed fl agella. (c) Dividing zygotes. Single arrows indicate fi rst and double arrows second zygotic division.
Insert shows metaphase confi guration during the fi rst division. (f) Egg - shaped daughter cells (arrows) resulting from one zygote,
with insert showing a daughter cell in phase contrast. Longitudinal fl agellum (lf); transverse fl agellum (tf) . Scale bars, 10 μ m.

160 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
infections or to form dormant stages. Some spore types 3. Sporocytes forming “ rosace ” Duboscquodinium
may serve only as gametes, lacking the ability to infect stage kofoidi
host cells, while others may transmit infections or 3 ′ . Sporogenesis without 4
produce resting cysts. Cysts or other free - living life - “ rosace ” stage ”
history stages provide a refuge for parasites when host
4. Dinospores with pointed Tintinnophagus
organisms are unavailable and are critical for the sur-
episome and conspicuous acutus
vival of host - specifi c parasites that must kill their host
eyespot
to reproduce (i.e., parasitoids). Thus, it is likely that 4 ′ . Dinospores with rounded Duboscquella
at least some parasites of tintinnids form cysts. So
episome; lacking conspicuous tintinnicola
far, resting cysts have not been unambiguously
eyespot
documented for syndinean dinofl agellates; however,
5. Nuclear division in trophont Amoebophrya
dormancy of Amoebophrya sp. within the cyst of its
forming “ beehive ” stage tintinni
dinofl agellate host has been demonstrated (Chambou-
5 ′ . Nuclear division occurring in 6
vet et al. 2011) .
tomont
6. Sporocytes as tightly packed Euduboscquella
Key to the dinofl agellate parasites cluster cachoni
of tintinnids 6 ′ . Sporocytes not tightly packed 7
7. Shield with single sagittal Euduboscquella
Given the extensive diversity of syndinean dinofl agel- groove aspida
lates revealed by environmental sequencing (Guillou 7 ′ . Shield with six or seven Euduboscquella
et al. 2008 ) and recent recognition that ciliates are nearly parallel grooves anisospora
also parasitized by dinophycean species (Coats et al. 7 ′′ . Shield with 20 – 30 grooves Euduboscquella
2010 ), it seems reasonable to expect discovery of addi- spiraling out from center cnemata
tional tintinnid parasites. Indeed, single cell sequenc- 7 ′′′ . Shield with numerous Euduboscquella
ing of tintinnids infected by syndinean dinofl agellates intertwining grooves crenulata
has revealed greater sequence diversity than can be
accounted for by currently described species (Bachvar-
off et al. 2012 ). Thus, the following key is provided
as a tentative guide in identifying dinofl agellates 6.3 MOLECULAR EVOLUTION OF
that parasitize tintinnids, with revision certainly to DINOFLAGELLATES PARASITIZING
be required as new species are described and as cur- TINTINNIDS
rently valid, but poorly characterized, species are
redescribed. Placement of tintinnid parasites
within the dinofl agellates
The broadest, most inclusive clade of dinofl agellates
Key to the dinofl agellate parasites of tintinnids
has been placed at various taxonomic levels (e.g.,
1. Extracellular parasite; 2 Dinozoa (Adl et al. 2005 ) or Dinofl agellata (Dodge &
dinokont spores with Lee 2000 )) and can be very roughly divided into two
well - developed cingulum and large bins: the syndineans (subphylum Syndinea
sulcus Corliss, 1984) and the dinokaryotes (subphylum
1′. Intracellular parasite; 5 Dinokaryota Fensome et al., 1993 ) (Fig. 6.15 a). The
multiple spore types possible, blastodiniphyceans (subphylum Dinokaryota; class
but dinokont spores lack Blastodiniphyceae Fensome et al., 1993 ) were once
strongly developed cingulum considered a distinct parasitic lineage within the
and sulcus dinokaryotes, but have since been shown to be grossly
2. Tomont with double outer Duboscquodinium polyphyletic and scattered across molecular phyloge-
membrane collini nies (Litaker et al. 1999 ; Saldarriaga et al. 2001 ; Levy
2 ′ . Tomont without double outer 3 et al. 2007 ; Skovgaard et al. 2007 ; Coats et al. 2010 ).
membrane Several troublesome genera including O xyrrhis , Perkin-

Parasites of tintinnids 161
sus , Parvilucifera , and Thallassomyces are affi liated with subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA) - based molecular
the dinofl agellates on molecular trees, but do not fi t phylogenies for dinokaryotes are notoriously poorly
well in either the dinokaryote or syndinean bin (Noren supported, with only a few well - supported clades con-
et al. 1999; Saldarriaga et al. 2003 ; Silberman et al. sistently found (Saunders et al. 1997 ; Saldarriaga et al.
2004 ). None of these troublesome genera are parasites 2001 ; Murray et al. 2005 ; Shalchian - Tabrizi et al.
of tintinnids, so they can be safely ignored in this 2006 ). Despite the vagueness of the molecular phylog-
treatment. eny, T. acutus and related heterotrophs can be seen as
Dinokaryotes, as implied by the name, have several sharing extracellular feeding by a peduncle, followed
unique, presumably derived characters of the nucleus by a non - motile division stage. In some species ( A. ocel-
including the following: (1) condensed chromosomes latum , P seudopfi esteria shumwayae , Paulsenella , and T .
during interphase, (2) unusual closed mitosis with acutus ) the division cyst produces multiple dinospores,
extranuclear spindle, (3) low protein:DNA ratios, (4) whereas the other species produce only two daughter
DNA not packaged with histones into nucleosomes, (5) cells (Parrow & Burkholder 2003 ; Calado et al. 2009 )
high DNA content, (6) modifi ed DNA bases, and fi nally Another dinokaryote parasite of tintinnids, D ubosc-
(7) many highly duplicated protein - coding genes quodinium collini , has only been reported twice in the
(Spector 1984 ; Bachvaroff & Place 2008 ). Syndineans literature (Chatton 1952 ; Coats et al. 2010 ). The SSU
have closed mitosis with an extranuclear spindle (Ris rRNA from D uboscquodinium collini is scarcely dis-
& Kubai 1974 ), but differ from the dinokaryotes by tinguishable from the homologous sequences from
their apparent lack of condensed chromosomes during several Scrippsiella spp. and Peridinium polonicum , with
interphase, small number of chromosomes indicating only four base positions differing between D. collini
low DNA content, and a suffi cient quantity of basic andS. trochoidea , 0.2% difference (Coats et al. 2010 ).
proteins associated with chromosomes to be detected On SSU rRNA trees, the genera Peridinium and S cripp-
histochemically, although organization of histones as siella are polyphyletic (Logares et al. 2007a; Coats et al.
nucleosomes has not been demonstrated (Cachon 2010 ). The very small amount of SSU sequence differ-
1964 ; Loeblich III 1976 ). ence among D. collini , Scrippsiella spp., and P eridinium
Dinofl agellate parasites of tintinnids appear to have polonicum may refl ect either recent divergence or high
evolved independently several times. Historically, all sequence conservation within this group of dinokary-
dinofl agellates that use tintinnids as hosts were consid- otes.Scrippsiella hangoei and Peridinium aciculiferum are
ered to be syndineans (Fensome et al. 1993 ). Recent even a more extreme example. The two species have
investigations combining molecular and morphologi- identical rRNA loci despite clear differences in mito-
cal approaches, however, have placed two of those chondrial genes, plate tabulation, and salinity prefer-
genera, Duboscquella and D uboscquodinium , among the ences (Logares et al. 2007b ). If a similar pattern occurs
dinokaryotes and revealed a previously undescribed within other related lineages, SSU rRNA gene trees
dinokaryote genus, T intinnophagus , that infects tintin- may not effectively capture species or genus level
nids (Coats et al. 2010, 2012 ). Thus, the syndinean and relationships.
dinokaryote lineages now each contain at least two dif- In reference to D uboscquodinium collini , details of life
ferent genera that parasitize tintinnids. Despite recent cycle, development, and host preference or specifi city
advances in assessing the diversity of dinofl agellate are not completely understood. Although Dubosc-
parasites of tintinnids, the number of described genera quodinium collini does not appear to be photosynthetic,
and species will likely continue to expand in the future. Scrippsiella would be considered a photosynthetic
genus. In dinofl agellates, photosynthesis appears to be
an unreliable character, with the genera Blastodinium
Dinokaryote parasites of tintinnids and Polykrikos containing both photosynthetic and
non - photosynthetic species (Chatton 1920 ; Hoppen-
The recently described tintinnid parasite T intinnopha- rath et al. 2010 ). Alternately, Scrippsiella and Dubosc-
gus acutus was placed without strong support near quodinium , like many photosynthetic dinofl agellates,
a “ Pfi esteria - group ” composed of heterotrophic free - may be mixotrophic, and the chloroplasts may be
living genera (L uciella , P fi esteria , Pseudopfi esteria , reduced or inconspicuous while the dinofl agellate is
Stoeckeria , and C ryptoperidinopsis ), as well as the para- feeding (Hansen 2011 ).
sitic species Amyloodinium ocellatum and Paulsenella Despite the diffi culty in defi ning dinokaryote rela-
vostonochi (Fig. 6.15 b). It is worth noting that small- tionships based on SSU gene trees, Tintinnophagus

Fig. 6.15 Phylogeny of dinofl agellates using SSU rRNA. (a) A schematic phylogeny of the dinofl agellate lineage showing the
different syndinean clades and the dinokaryotes as a polytomy (adapted and revised from Guillou, L., Viprey, M., Chambouvet,
A., Welsh, R.M., Kirkham, A.R., Massana, R., Scanlan, D.J. & Worden A.Z. ( 2008 ) Widespread occurrence and genetic
diversity of marine parasitoids belonging to Syndiniales (Alveolata). Environmental Microbiology, 10, 3349 – 3365) . (b) Partial
phylogeny of the dinokaryotes including two species parasitic on tintinnids. Values above nodes are ML/MrBayes/ ML - distance
bootstrap or p values (adapted from Coats, D.W., Kim, S., Bachvaroff, T.R., Handy, S.M. & Delwiche, C.F. ( 2010 ) T intinnophagus
acutus n. g., n. sp. (Phylum Dinofl agellata), an ectoparasite of the ciliate Tintinnopsis cylindrica Daday 1887, and its
relationship to Duboscquodinium collini Grass é 1952 . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, 57, 468 – 482) . Underlined species are
parasites of tintinnids. (c) Partial phylogeny of syndinean dinofl agellates from clade I showing only subclade 4. Underlined
sequences are from tintinnid hosts, all other sequences are from environmental clone libraries. Maximum likelihood bootstrap
values are shown above the branches (adapted from Bachvaroff, T.R., Kim, S., Guillou, L., Delwiche, C.F. & Coats, D.W. ( 2012 )
Diversity of the syndinian genus E uduboscquella based on single cell PCR. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, in press.
Copyright © American Society for Microbiology) .

Parasites of tintinnids 163
acutus and D uboscquodinium collini are clearly dinokary- gaard et al. 2005) . Sequences available for the several
otes based both on molecular trees and morphology. In isolates of A moebophrya , Hematodinium , and E udubosc-
addition, the two genera have little affi nity on SSU gene quella are consistent with multiple species within each
trees, suggesting they have evolved independently. At genus. Overall, syndinean environmental sequences
present, based exclusively on molecular data, two dis- present in GenBank continue to dwarf those from
tinct dinokaryote species parasitize tintinnids, with described species and genera.
a third, Duboscquella tintinnicola , awaiting molecular In SSU phylogenies of syndineans and dinokaryotes,
characterization. In addition, two other completely there are several well - supported and consistent rela-
uncharacterized tintinnid parasites have been found tionships interspersed among poorly supported and
within the dinokaryotes (T.R. Bachvaroff, unpublished inconsistent relationships (Saunders et al. 1997 ;
observations). Saldarriaga et al. 2001 ; Murray et al. 2005 ; Shalchian -
Tabrizi et al. 2006 ). Starting from the most expansive
view of the dinofl agellate lineage, the relation-
Syndinean parasites of tintinnids ships among the genera Perkinsus and O xyrrhis , the
dinokaryotes, and the numerous syndinean clades are
The fi rst view of the broad molecular diversity of synd- ambiguous, even when using multiple protein - coding
inean dinofl agellates was based on environmental genes for phylogeny (Saldarriaga et al. 2003 ; Bach-
clone libraries. These sequences were directly acquired varoff et al. 2 011 ). Monophyly of the dinofl agellate
from whole or size - fractionated water samples, without lineage, as defi ned above, is consistent, but rarely well
knowing the identity of the organisms contributing supported (Litaker et al. 1999 ; Leander et al. 2003 ;
the sequences. Phylogenies from such datasets pro- Richards & Bass 2005 ; Skovgaard et al. 2005, 2009 ;
duced two broad and diverse “ Marine Alveolate ” Harada et al. 2007 ; Guillou et al. 2008 ), except when
clades, simply labeled clades I and II (Moon - van der protein - coding genes are used (Bachvaroff et al. 2011 ).
Staay et al. 2001) . Both clades are here considered Bootstrap support for syndinean clades I through V
syndinean dinofl agellates. Clade II contained sequences as distinct lineages within the Syndinea is consist-
attributed to the parasitic genus A moebophrya , while ently recovered, while support for monophyly of the
clade I contained no sequences attributed to described dinokaryotes is often poor when large numbers of
species. The most striking features of these trees were syndinean sequences are included (compare Coats
the diversity and divergence of the sequences. Subse- et al. (2010) to Guillou et al. (2008) ).
quent increases in the number of environmental clone Constructing good phylogenies can be diffi cult
library sequences and novel sequences for described because of the sheer number of sequences, and the
syndineans have developed a broad but not fully SSU alignment can be uncertain and dependent on
resolved picture. Within syndinean dinofl agellates, taxon sampling. Several diffi cult long - branch genera,
the original clades I and II have been expanded to fi ve such as Oxyrrhis , Noctiluca , and Thallassomyces , and
(Guillou et al. 2008 ) or eight (Richards & Bass 2005 ) the specter of chimeric environmental clone library
deeply diverging clades. The most commonly found sequences are other concerns. Chimeric sequences can
sequences are still those associated with the original result from artifi cially ligating partial sequences from
clades I and II, and these are the two clades containing two or more organisms into a single linear sequence
parasites of tintinnids. and can be diffi cult to uncover in the absence of a well -
Over the past several years, rRNA sequences from sampled set of reference sequences obtained from indi-
representatives for fi ve of the 14 syndinean genera viduals (see Berney et al. 2004 ). These factors can limit
(excluding D uboscquodinium ) recognized by Fensome et the analytic methods. However, even with robust likeli-
al. (1993) have been placed in GenBank: Amoebophrya hood methods and subsampling of the data, the phyl-
(Janson et al. 2000 ; Gunderson et al. 2 002; Salomon ogenies strongly support the clades labeled with roman
et al. 2003 ; Kim 2006; Kim et al. 2 008 ), E udubosc- numerals, but not the relationships among them, and
quella species previously placed in D uboscquella (Harada the bootstrap support for the dinokaryotes is still poor
et al. 2007 ; Bachvaroff et al. 2012 ; Coats et al. 2 012 ), even after specifi c long - branch taxa are removed (Fig
Hematodinium (Small et al. 2006, 2007 ; Ryazanova et 6.15 a). From a strict perspective, the dinokaryotes
al. 2010 ), Ichthyodinium (Mori et al. 2007 ; Yuasa et al. can be viewed as an uncertain paraphyletic group
2007 ; Skovgaard et al. 2009 ), and S yndinium (Skov- intermingled with the syndineans, but these rRNA

164 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
phylogenies contrast with both morphologic features described species. The boundaries of the genus Eudu-
and poorly sampled protein - coding gene trees that boscquella on phylogenies remains very uncertain,
together support monophyly of the dinokaryotes. perhaps refl ecting the lack of sequences for species
The deep branching syndinean clades I and II diverge that infect non - tintinnid hosts. Two species, Eudu-
as deeply as the dinokaryotes or Perkinsus on SSU trees, boscquella melo and Euduboscquella nucleocola , are
but are here treated as a single lineage, the syndineans known to infect dinofl agellates (Cachon 1964 ), but
(Fig. 6.15 a). Although the clade label nomenclature rRNA sequences are not available for either. In addi-
anticipates major higher - level taxonomic revision, tion, some parasites of radiolarians have features of
these phylogenies were exclusively based on rRNA, and Euduboscquella (Suzuki et al. 2009 ), and some rRNA
few of the syndinean clades contain sequences attrib- sequences from radiolarian associates fall within clade
uted to described genera or species. Using the dinokary- I (Dolven et al. 2007 ). However, sequences clearly
otes as a cautionary example, rRNA evolution in the attributable to Euduboscquella are not yet available for
syndineans may be discontinuous with equal rates radiolarian parasites.
of evolution in different lineages. The combination of A similar situation exists in syndinean clade II,
molecular data, morphology, and good sampling across where there are many environmental clone sequences
the different lineages will be required to describe these and a handful of sequences attributed to the genus
relationships accurately. Amoebophrya . This syndinean genus is most commonly
The genus Euduboscquella is embedded in syndinean found as an intracellular parasite of photosynthetic
clade I with good support (Harada et al. 2007 ; Guillou and heterotrophic dinokaryotes; however, one species,
et al. 2008 ; Skovgaard et al. 2009 ;Bachvaroff et al. A. grassei , infects syndineans of the genus Oodinium ,
2012 ) (Fig. 6.15 c). Within clade I, a total of eight two species parasitize ciliates (A . tintinni from tintin-
different subclades have been defi ned using Arabic nids andA. rosei from aloricate ciliates living in sipho-
numerals (Guillou et al. 2008 ), a nomenclature that nophores and chaetognaths), and one species is known
will be followed here. Euduboscquella forms a portion from each of the rhizarians Acanthometra pellucida
of subclade 4, creating a well - supported Eudubosc- andSticholonche zanclea (Cachon 1964 ). Unfortunately,
quella clade containing mostly sequences attributed molecular data for Amoebophrya species from hosts
to the genus, with just a few environmental clone other than photosynthetic dinokaryotes are not yet
library sequences. The only other subclade containing available.
sequences attributed to a described species or genus is The phylogenetic structure of syndinean clade II dif-
subclade 3 withIchthyodinium (Skovgaard et al. 2009 ). fers strongly from clade I, with up to 44 different sub-
Subclade 3 is the only subclade within syndinean clade clades recognized, but with distance - based trees
I that was poorly supported by bootstrapping (Bach- providing poor support for relationships between and
varoff et al. 2012 ; Guillou et al. 2008 ). In a maximum within the different subclades (Guillou et al. 2008 ).
likelihood analysis of syndinean clade I, the vast major- Sequences for Amoebophrya from photosynthetic di-
ity of total sequences are found in subclades 1 and 5 nokaryote hosts are not monophyletic in these trees
(Guillou et al. 2008 ; Bachvaroff et al. 2012 ). Subc- and do not form simple monophyletic lineages, even
lades 1, 2, 5, and 7 form one well - supported lineage, with much smaller sampling of environmental clone
while subclades 4, 6, 8, and 3 form a second well - sequences (Kim et al. 2008 ). Based on culture experi-
supported lineage (data not shown). The relationships ments, someAmoebophrya strains that infect photosyn-
among subclades 4, 6, 8, and 3 or among subclades 1, thetic dinokaryotes have clear host specifi city, while
2, 5, and 7 are not well resolved. others have a broader host range, suggesting species
What is clear, based on SSU phylogenies and con- level differences among strains. Sequence diversity for
fi rmed by ITS2 datasets, is that E uduboscquella proba- these strains also suggests that more A moebophrya spe-
bly contains more species than have been formally cies are present than just the single species A. ceratii
described. Although fi ve species have been formally formally described from photosynthetic dinofl agellate
described, only two of seven distinct Euduboscquella hosts. Such results suggest that connecting molecular
ITS2 ribotypes could be attributed to described species data with A moebophrya from tintinnid and other non -
(Coats et al. 2012 ). This leaves fi ve different parasite dinokaryote hosts may reveal yet another complicated
ribotypes that have not yet been clearly attributed to pattern of diversity.

Parasites of tintinnids 165
6.4 ECOLOGY OF TINTINNID PARASITES tintinnid abundance is generally higher (Chapter 9 )
and frequent sampling is possible. Infections of Eutin-
Distribution, seasonality, and host range tinnus fraknoii off the coast of Chile (J. Dolan, unpub-
lished observations) and Parafavella spp. in the Arctic
Parasitism of tintinnids by dinofl agellates occurs cir- Ocean (Meunier 1910 ; reported as spores) suggest that
cumglobally in temperate to subtropical waters (Fig. high host abundance is not a prerequisite for tintinnid
6.16 ); however, data are insuffi cient to assess the parasitism, with tintinnid parasites likely to occur in
distribution of particular parasite species. Given the other pelagic settings.
recent recognition of dinophycean infections in tintin- Parasitism of tintinnids occurs throughout the year,
nids (Coats et al. 2010) , it is not surprising that most but seasonal patterns differ among parasite taxa. The
accounts involve parasitism by syndinean dinofl agel- syndinean parasites Amoebophrya tintinni and E udu-
lates, particularly E uduboscquella spp. Nonetheless, the boscquella spp. are most common in summer months
limited data available for dinophycean parasites of tin- when phytoplankton biomass is suffi cient to support
tinnids suggest that they are as broadly distributed as elevated host densities (Cachon 1964; Coats & Heisler
their syndinean counterparts. Also understandable is 1989 ; Coats et al. 1994 ), although tintinnids infected
that most observations are from coastal waters where by these species have been reported from March to
Fig. 6.16 Global distribution of dinofl agellate parasites of tintinnids. Data compiled from Agatha & Riedel - Lorj é (2006) ;
Akselman & Santinelli (1989) ; Bachvaroff et al. (2012) ; Cachon (1964) ; Campbell (1927) ; Chatton (1952) ; Coats & Heisler
(1989) ; Coats et al. (1994; 2010; 2012) ; J. Dolan (unpublished observations); Duboscq & Collin (1910) ; Entz (1909) ; Haeckel
(1873) ; Hada (1932a) ; Harada et al. (2007) ; Hofker (1931) ; Konovalova (2007) ; Laackmann (1908) ; Lohmann (1908) ;
Meunier (1910) ; Pierce & Turner (1994) ; Stoecker et al. (1983) . Syndinean dinofl agellates (fi lled circle); dinophycean parasites
(open circle); both syndinean and dinophycean parasites (half - fi lled circles); unknown parasites (circle with fi lled quarters).

166 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
October (Stoecker et al. 1983 ; Cachon 1964 ; Coats & ehrenbergii , E uduboscquella crenulata and E . a spida
Heisler 1989 ; Bachvaroff et al. 2012 ). Dinophycean reported from Favella panamensis, and Duboscquodinium
parasites apparently have a broader temperature kofoidi and Euduboscquella aspida occurring in Tintin-
range, as they have been reported during summer nopsis campanula (Chatton 1952 ; Cachon 1964 ; Coats
and winter, with Duboscquella tintinnicola parasitizing et al. 1994, 2012 ). In addition, the same host cell can
Stenosemella nivalis from July to September (Lohmann be simultaneously infected by more than one parasite
1908 ), Duboscquodinium collini found in E utintinnus species (D.W. Coats, unpublished observations).
fraknoii during September and December (Coats et al.
2010 ; J. Dolan, unpublished observations), and T intin-
nophagus acutus occurring in T intinnopsis cylindrica Parasite prevalence and impact
from July through February (Agatha & Riedel - Lorj é on host populations
2006 ; Coats et al. 2 010) . Infection of tintinnids
(Codonella sp.) in winter was also reported by Pierce & Cachon (1964) provided the fi rst insight into the eco-
Turner (1994) , but the taxonomic affi nity of the para- logical importance of parasitism in tintinnids when he
site is uncertain. noted that populations of Favella ehrenbergii in Algiers
Parasitic dinofl agellates, or spores most likely derived harbor showed dramatic fl uctuations during summer,
from parasitic infections, have been reported from over with most cells being infected by E uduboscquella during
30 tintinnid species representing the genera Amphore- abrupt declines in tintinnid abundance. Cachon (1964)
llopsis , C odonella , Coxliella , Cyttarocylis , Eutintinnus , also noted that, of the several co - occurring tintinnids,
Favella , Helicostomella , Parafavella , Rhabdonella , Salping- the species infected by Euduboscquella differed from
ella , S teenstrupiella , S tenosemella , Tintinnopsis , and X ys- day to day. Unable to explain that observation, he
tonella (Haeckel 1873 ; Laackmann 1908 ; Lohmann speculated that morphologically indistinguishable
1908 ; Entz 1909 ; Meunier 1910 ; Hofker 1931 ; Camp- host - specifi c parasites might be parasitizing different
bell 1927 ; Cachon 1 964; Coats 1988 ; Coats et al. tintinnid species over time. Although sequential infec-
1994, 2010 ; Pierce & Turner 1994 ; Konovalova 2007 ; tion of tintinnid species by different parasites seems
Bachvaroff et al. 2012 ). Parasitism has been observed likely, it is also possible for multiple host species to
on only a single occasion in two - thirds of the tintinnid be simultaneously infected by one or more parasite
species, with an equal number of species hosting uni- species. That is clearly the case in Chesapeake Bay,
dentifi ed parasites. Thus, it is impossible to assess the where Stylicauda platensis , Tintinnopsis major , Tintin-
host range of tintinnid parasites reliably. Of the 10 nopsis panamensis , Tintinnopsis cf. subacuta and Tintin-
dinofl agellate species described as parasites of tintin- nopsis radix showed co -o ccurring infections (Fig. 6.17 ).
nids, three are known to infect more than one host S. platensis , T. major , T. panamensis , and T. cf. s ubacuta
species:Duboscquella tintinnicola in S tenosemella nivalis were parasitized by E uduboscquella spp., whereas T .
and Coxliella helix ; Euduboscquella aspida in C oxliella radix was infected by an unidentifi ed dinophycean par-
laciniosa , E utintinnus fraknoii , F avella ehrenbergii , F . asite. All fi ve hosts were present in the lower Bay, but
panamensis , and T intinnopsis campanula ; Euduboscquella only four were parasitized in that region. The failure of
cachoni in E utintinnus pectinis and E. tenuis (Cachon parasites to spread to T . cf. s ubacuta in the lower Bay,
1964 ; Coats 1988 ; Coats et al. 1994, 2012 ; Bachvar- along with infection of that host species in the upper
off et al. 2012 ). A moebophrya tintinni is known only Bay, suggests that at least two species of Euduboscquella
fromXystonella lohmanni , Duboscquodinium collini from were infecting the tintinnids. As mentioned above, spe-
Eutintinnus fraknoii , Duboscquodinium kofoidi from T in- cifi city and host range of tintinnid parasites remains
tinnopsis campanula , Euduboscquella anisospora and E . unresolved; however, recent molecular data support
cnemata from F avella ehrenbergii , Euduboscquella crenu- the notion that tintinnids are parasitized by cryptic
lata from F avella panamensis , and T intinnophagus acutus species of parasitic dinofl agellates (Bachvaroff et al.
from Tintinnopsis cylindrica (Chatton 1952 ; Cachon 2012 ).
1964 ; Coats et al. 2010, 2012 ). Stoecker et al. (1983) observed outbreaks of Eudu-
A few tintinnids serve as hosts for at least two boscquella sp. near the end of F avella sp. blooms in Perch
different parasites, with D uboscquodinium collini and Pond (Woods Hole, Massachusetts) and suggested that
Euduboscquella aspida parasitizing E utintinnus fraknoii , mortality due to parasitism may have been an impor-
Euduboscquella anisospora and E . aspida infecting Favella tant factor in determining tintinnid net growth rates.

Parasites of tintinnids 167
908858 845834 818 804 744 724 707 908858 845834 818 804 744 724 707
0(a) 0 (f)
10 10
)m(
20 20
htpeD
30 30
40 Stylicauda platensis 40 Stylicauda platensis
50 cells/liter 50 percent cells infected
0(b) 0 (g)
10 10
)m(
20 20
htpeD
30 30
40 Tintinnopsis major 40 Tintinnopsis major
cells/liter percent cells infected
50 50
0 (c) 0 (h)
10 10
)m(
20 20
htpeD
30 30
40 Tintinnopsis panamensis 40 Tintinnopsis panamensis
cells/liter percent cells infected
50 50
0(d) 0 (i)
10 10
)m(
20 20
htpeD
30 30
40 Tintinnopsis radix 40 Tintinnopsis radix
cells/liter percent cells infected
50 50
0(e) 0 (j)
10 10
)m(
20 20
htpeD
30 30
40 Tintinnopsis of. subacuta 40 Tintinnopsis of. subacuta
cells/liter percent cells infected
50 50
Fig. 6.17 Abundance and parasite prevalence for fi ve tintinnid species along the longitudinal axis of Chesapeake Bay on July
23 – 24, 1990. Station designations located on upper graphs indicate minute and degree north latitude (e.g., 908 = 39 ° 08′ ;
707 = 37 ° 07′ ). Filled circles show sample depths and the solid undulating lines represent the bottom contour. (a – e) Host
abundance with increasing density of shading indicating > 50 – 100, > 100 – 300, > 300 – 500, and > 500 cells/liter for
(a) Stylicauda platensis ; > 15 – 25, > 25 – 50, > 50 – 100, > 100 – 150, > 150 – 300, and > 300 cells/liter for (b) T intinnopsis major ;
> 40 – 80, > 80 – 120, > 120 – 160, and > 160 cells/liter for (c) T intinnopsis panamensis ; > 25 – 50, > 50 – 100, > 100 – 150, > 150 – 300,
and > 300 cells/liter for (d) T intinnopsis radix ; > 50 – 100, > 100 – 500, > 500 – 1000, and > 1000 cells/liter for (e) T intinnopsis cf.
subacuta . (f – j) Percentage of host cells infected with increasing density of shading indicating > 5 – 10, > 10 – 15, and > 15% for
(f) S. platensis ; > 5 – 15, > 15 – 20, and > 20% for (g) T . major ; > 20 – 40, > 40 – 60, > 60 – 80, and > 80% for (h) T . panamensis ; > 1 – 3,
> 3 – 5, > 5 – 7, and > 7% for (i) T . radix ; > 10 – 25, > 25 – 50, and > 50% for (j) T . cf. subacuta . Data obtained following methods of
Coats et al. (1994) , except that parasite prevalence was determined from specimens stained using the quantitative protargol
technique (Montagnes & Lynn 1987 ) . Previously unpublished data provided by D.W. Coats.
In studies of two temperate estuaries, Coats & Heisler from July to September, with epizootics infecting 20 –
(1989) and Coats et al. (1994) also argued that parasit- 50% of host cells over broad areas. Bay- wide, parasite
ism had a signifi cant impact on tintinnid populations. prevalence averaged 5 – 18%, with parasite - induced
In Chesapeake Bay, kilometer - scale patches of E utintin- mortality removing 7 – 24% of host standing stock per
nus pectinis infected by Euduboscquella cachoni persisted day, a loss rate roughly equivalent to grazing pressure

168 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 6.18 Parasitism of Favella panamensis in the Indian River Lagoon during August 1992. (a) Abundance of F . panamensis
in surface water samples collected from Sebastian Inlet south to Vero Beach. (b) Percentage of cells infected by A moebophrya
sp. (c) Percentage of cells infected by E uduboscquella sp. Host abundance and parasite prevalence were determined following
methods of Coats et al. 1994 . Filled circles indicate sample locations. Previously unpublished data provided by D.W. Coats.
from the copepod Acartia tonsa . Similar results were the northern lagoon and moderate infection by E udu-
obtained for Favella panamensis in Chesapeake Bay boscquella in the southern lagoon were associated with
and the Indian River Lagoon, Florida, where parasitism a marked decline in host abundance in early August.
removed approximately 10% of host biomass per day. In Host density recovered over the following week, only to
the latter system, F . panamensis was infected by two dif- experience epizootic infection by E uduboscquella sp. in
ferent parasites, Euduboscquella sp. and Amoebophrya sp. the southern lagoon. Thus, the two parasites appear to
(Fig. 6.18 ). Epizootic infection by A moebophrya sp. in partition host resources in time and space.

Parasites of tintinnids 169
6.5 SUMMARY AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS nid biomass, parasitic dinofl agellates short circuit the
microbial loop, retaining resources at the microbial
Although parasitism of tintinnids has been known for level by transforming host biomass into nano- sized,
over a century, we are still in the discovery phase with typically short - lived, parasite progeny and by recy-
respect to parasite diversity, morphology, life history, cling host biomass as dissolved and particulate organic
cell biology, and ecology. Indeed, our understanding of matter released upon death of infected cells.
such topics is currently limited to parasitic dinofl agel- As Pomeroy & Wiebe (1988) indicated over two
lates, with other parasite taxa known to infect ciliates decades ago, our ability to model and quantify micro-
being unexplored among the tintinnids. Recent studies bial food webs is limited by our understanding of the
of tintinnid parasites have revealed new higher taxa of life histories and feeding strategies of parasitic and
dinofl agellates, previously unrecognized lifestyles, and predatory microorganisms. With that realization, the
cryptic diversity. Those discoveries suggested the need study of planktonic parasitism promises to be a fertile
for continued investigations and re - examination of the area for future research. From the perspective of tintin-
older, often poorly described species. From a molecu- nids as model organisms, it is informative to recog-
lar perspective, properly ordinating the evolutionary nize that sporogenic stages of parasitic dinofl agellates
changes between syndineans and dinokaryotes into remain in the lorica for some time after death of the
derived and primitive features can be challenging. host, making assessment of parasite abundance and
The poorly supported topologies on molecular trees host identifi cation easier and more reliable. By con-
combined with diffi culty in determining even basic trast, parasites that infect aloricate ciliates and most
morphology, cell biology, or genomic characters for other protists are immediately dispersed into the water
syndinean dinofl agellates means that the syndineans after death of the host, making identifi cation of the
can alternately be viewed as primitive in comparison host species and quantifi cation of sporogenic stages
to dinokaryotes, or as having lost dinokaryotic fea- problematic. Thus, tintinnids may well serve as an
tures. Resolution of such problems will require com- ideal model for fi eld studies assessing the ecological
bined morphological, developmental, and molecular importance of parasitism in planktonic protists.
approaches.
Research on the ecological function of parasites in
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems has shown parasit- 6.6 KEY POINTS
ism to be the most popular lifestyle on Earth, with
about half of all biodiversity derived from parasites 1. Of the various prokaryote and eukaryote organisms
(Dobson et al. 2008 ). Parasitism represents 75% of the known to infect ciliates, only dinofl agellate parasites
trophic links in ecosystems, with parasite biomass and are well documented for tintinnids.
production rivaling that of top predators (Dobson et al. 2. Dinofl agellate parasites of tintinnids encompass
2008 ; Kuris et al. 2008 ). Parasites shape host popula- endoparasitic syndinean species that grow in the cyto-
tions, infl uence the fl ow of energy and matter in food plasm or nucleus of their host and ectoparasitic dino-
webs, and promote ecosystem health by sustaining bio- phycean species that attach to the outside of the host
diversity (Horwitz & Wilcox 2005 ; Hudson et al. 2006 ; cell and act much like predators.
Lef è vre et al. 2 008) . Far less is known about planktonic 3. Life histories of syndinean and dinophycean para-
ecosystems, but information on the ecological signifi - sites of tintinnids are complex, appear not to require
cance of parasitism among planktonic organisms is an intermediate host, and are often incompletely
slowly growing. Tintinnid parasites occur in all seasons known, with a sexual cycle clearly documented for
and in coastal to pelagic systems. Epizootic infections only one species.
of tintinnids are not uncommon and appear to drive 4. As with many protistan groups, the taxonomy and
the decline of host species; however, the infl uence of phylogeny of dinofl agellate parasites is in a state of
such events on tintinnid species succession is unclear. fl ux, with undiscovered taxa and cryptic species likely
From the perspective of the marine pelagic food web, to emerge with new morphological, developmental,
tintinnid parasites compete with larger consumers and molecular data.
(metazoan zooplankton, fi sh larvae, and benthic 5. Parasitism of tintinnids is widespread, occurring in
invertebrates; Chapter 5) for an important and poten- all seasons, in coastal to pelagic settings, and in arctic
tially high - quality food source. By cropping tintin- to subtropical environments.

170 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
6. Parasitic dinofl agellates typically prevent reproduc- ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
tion of their tintinnid hosts and are often lethal, with
epizootics contributing to the decline of host This material is based in part on work supported by
populations. the National Science Foundation under Grant No.
7. Tintinnid parasites compete with metazoan con- 8911316 and 0629624. Any opinions, fi ndings, and
sumers and facilitate recycling of materials at the conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
microbial level. material are those of the authors and do not necessar-
8. Developmental stages of parasitic dinofl agellates ily refl ect the views of the National Science Founda-
are retained within the host lorica, facilitating identi- tion. Contribution No. 870 of the Smithsonian Marine
fi cation and enumerations of infected species. Thus, Station at Fort Pierce, Florida. We thank Lois Reid for
tintinnids provide a unique opportunity for studying illustrations and Paula Villanueva for assistance in
the ecological signifi cance of parasitism among plank- processing Chesapeake Bay samples.
tonic protists.

Chapter 7
Comparative Biology
of Tintinnid Cysts
Takashi Kamiyama
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, Fisheries Research Agency, Shiogama,
Miyagi, Japan
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
171

172 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
7.1 INTRODUCTION oligotrich ciliates in lake waters (M ü ller & W ü nsch
1999 ).
What is a cyst?
In the life cycle of a microorganism, a “ cyst ” is a resting Historical overview of tintinnid and
or dormant stage. Often the special morphology of a aloricate ciliate cysts
cyst allows it to withstand harsh environmental condi-
tions. The cyst is commonly thought of as a state of The extreme changes in physiology and morphology
suspended animation in which the metabolic processes between the vegetative and cyst stages of ciliates have
of the cell are slowed down and the cell ceases activi- attracted the attention of many biologists over the
ties such as feeding and locomotion (e.g., Wikipedia). years. For instance, since the early 1900s, physiologi-
Besides protists and bacteria, some sort of a resting cal, morphological, and ecological studies have been
stage or cyst is common to many taxa of planktonic conducted on cysts of soil and pond ciliates (e.g., the
organisms of variety of trophic levels (Belmonte et al. genera Colpoda , Didinium , Dileptus , Amphileptus , Z ooth-
1997 ). Cysts of planktonic organisms are often likened amnium ). Several general reviews on ciliate cysts are
to “ seeds” with the benthos as a “ seedbank ” and available (e.g., van Wagtendonk 1955 ; Corliss & Esser
although they allow survival under unsuitable envi- 1974 ; Bussers 1984 ; Bradbury 1987 ; Matsusaka
ronmental conditions, they can, like seeds, also play 2006 ; Lynn 2008 ; Verni & Rosati 2011 ). However,
a role in dispersal. In some taxa, cysts represent an these reviews reveal that information is limited largely
obligatory stage, the product of genetic recombination to ciliate species that are relatively easy to culture.
resulting from conjugation (compare with section Nonetheless, even among this small number of ciliate
“ Factors inducing encystment ” on pages 177 – 178 ). species, the factors inducing encystment and excyst-
Cysts can infl uence population dynamics, serving as a ment appear diverse with few consistent phenomena.
“ source ” when individuals emerge from cysts (excyst- Thus, reviews on ciliate cysts have repeatedly pointed
ment) or as a “ sink ” when part of the population out that most aspects of the physiological and ecologi-
undergoes cyst formation (encystment). cal characteristics of ciliate cysts are still unknown
Cysts of tintinnid ciliates are relatively conspicuous (e.g., Corliss & Esser 1974 ; Bussers 1984 ; Matsusaka
because they are usually formed within loricae, and 2006 ; Foissner et al. 2007 ; Verni & Rosati 2011 ).
have thus often been observed in natural plankton Tintinnid cysts were fi rst reviewed by Reid & John
assemblages. In many coastal species of tintinnids, the (1978) who focused mainly on morphological charac-
occurrence of the planktonic stage (= vegetative cells) teristics. Although confusion of tintinnid cysts and
is distinctly seasonal with cells found in the water parasites was mentioned in their review, they stated
column for only a relatively short period of time (see that many types of tintinnid cyst have been observed
Chapter 10 ). The regular seasonality of coastal plank- in seawater and sediment samples, suggesting that
ton species, with sudden appearance and disappear- the cyst stage is likely an important process in the life
ance, has long been thought to be associated with history of coastal tintinnid species. Since their review,
the existence of resting stages of some sort (Smetacek many studies on the occurrence and ecology of a
1985 ). variety of ciliate cysts in both freshwater and seawa-
The role of tintinnid cysts in dispersal is unknown. ter systems have been conducted. Unfortunately, our
The cysts in marine species which sink to the bottom knowledge of tintinnid encystment and excystment
sediments may have few chances to be dispersed. remains very incomplete. The physiological and eco-
However, tintinnid cysts in shallow waters are possibly logical characteristics of cysts of tintinnid and oligot-
transported by natural dispersal mechanisms (e.g., richs, the main ciliate components in marine plankton
water circulation, transport on feathers or feet of communities, appear to be considerably different
birds) and by artifi cial means such as ballast waters from those of terrestrial (soil or pond) species. In this
(Pierce et al. 1997 ). Tintinnids also occur in freshwater chapter, information on occurrence and ecological
systems (e.g., Foissner & Wilbert 1979 ). Although function of marine tintinnid cysts will be reviewed
there is no information on cysts in freshwater tin- and compared with fi ndings on cysts of the other
tinnids, it is possible that the life cycles of freshwater common protists of the marine plankton, oligotrichs,
tintinnids include a cyst stage like those known for and dinofl agellates.

Comparative biology of tintinnid cysts 173
7.2 MORPHOLOGY (e.g., Matsuoka & Fukuyo 2000 ) and distributions
(e.g., Marret & Zonneveld 2003 ). Compared with
Characteristics of tintinnid cysts observed dinofl agellates, there have been relatively few studies
in seawater samples of oligotrich cysts.
The cysts of oligotrich ciliates are typically fl ask -
Tintinnid cysts have been often observed in natural shaped like a Favella cyst and usually have a clear
plankton assemblages (e.g., Paranjape 1980 ) as well plug - like structure (papula), which is the exit point of
as in sediment trap samples (Price & Pospelova 2011 ). the ciliate during the excystment (Fig. and Plate 7.2 ).
Although the cysts themselves have relatively few mor- The cysts of tintinnids and heterotrich ciliates, which
phological characters, because they are in the lorica, have some common morphological characteristics
presumably we know which species formed the cyst (fl ask - shape and papula), were once described as
(Fig. and Plate 7.1 ). Presumptive cysts of more than members of “ papuliferes ” (Meunier 1910 ). These
20 species were described from seawater or sediment characteristics of papuliferes led to the suggestion of
samples (Reid & John 1978 ). However, it should be a common phylogenetic origin different from hypot-
noted that distinguishing cysts from a developmental rich ciliates that produce simple spherical cysts (Reid
stage of a parasite infection can be diffi cult (see Chapter & John 1983 ).
6 ). Early studies of tintinnids often described cyst (or a From the examples of the cysts of oligotrich shown
“ spore ” ) formation that was quite likely a parasite in Fig. and Plate 7.2 , it is clear that the gross morphol-
stage (e.g., Haeckel 1873 ; Laackmann 1908 ; Meunier ogy is quite variable and the fi ne structure is quite vari-
1910 ). Complete cycles of both encystment and excyst- able as well. The cyst wall can consist of one thick layer
ment have been observed only in species of Favella and in some species (Kim & Taniguchi 1995 ; M ü ller 1996 ;
Helicostomella . Excystment alone has been observed in Kim et al. 2002b ) whereas others have an addi-
species of Eutintinnus and Tintinnopsis. tional outer - membrane such as S trombidium crassulum
Typically the cysts are fl ask - shaped as in A can- (species name identifi ed provisionally; Reid 1987 ). In
thostomella , Eutintinnus , F avella , Helicostomella , L ep- Strombidium conicum there is a smooth exterior mem-
rotintinnus , Metacylis , Parundella , and Tintinnopsis , and brane that can be dissolved with 1 N hydrochloride
cylindrical as in Helicostomella (Reid & John 1983 ). In (Kim & Taniguchi 1995 ). Still others have no mem-
the case of Favella , the cyst has been described as brane outside of the cysts such as Cyrtostrombidium
granular protoplasm within a fl ask - shaped container boreale (Kim et al. 2 002b ).
of a thick hyaline wall terminated with a disk - shaped The cyst walls of Strombidium capitatum and Strom-
operculum (Reid & John 1978 ). The droplet - shaped bidium biarmatum are covered with spines (Kim et al.
cyst described as “F usopsis ” by Meunier (1910) and 2002b, 2008 ; Agatha et al. 2005 ). In the case of
depicted as a possible tintinnid cyst by Reid & John Meseres corlissi , a conspicuous coat of extracellular
( 1978 , fi g. 1h, g.) is now known to very closely resem- organic scales (termed “ lepidosomes ” ) occurs on the
ble the cyst of the oligotrich C yrtostrombidium (Kim cyst wall. The structure of the cyst wall was examined
et al. 2002b ). in detail using light and electron microscopy and found
to be composed of glycoproteins and chitin (Foissner
2005 ; Foissner et al. 2005 ). In S trombidium crassulum ,
Characteristics of oligotrich and detailed qualitative information on the cyst wall
dinofl agellate c ysts obtained using energy - dispersive X - ray spectroscopy
and cytochemical analysis suggested it was made of
Oligotrichs and dinofl agellates, many of which also calcium phosphate or calcium carbonate incorporated
form cysts, occur with tintinnids in the plankton (see in an organic matrix (Reid 1 987 ).
Chapter 9 ). Consequently, in seawater and surface sedi- A comparative study of the cysts of two oligotrich
ment samples, cysts of oligotrichs and dinofl agellates species, Halteria grandinella and Pelagostrombidium
may be found along with tintinnid cysts. There is a very fallax , and three hypotrich species L aurentiella
large literature on dinofl agellate cysts by both plankton strenua , S teinia sphagnicola and Oxytricha granulifera ,
researchers and paleontologists. In this chapter, dino- showed that each species had distinct, very likely non -
fl agellate cysts will only be briefl y covered; interested homologous, cyst surface characteristics (spine, thorns,
readers are directed to general reviews of methods fi brous and tubular lepidosomes, perilemma) (Foissner

Fig. 7.1 Photographs of tintinnid cysts from coastal waters of central and western Japan (from Kamiyama 1994c ).
(a)Tintinnopsis beriodea . (b) T intinnopsis sp. (c) T intinnopsis corniger . (d) Tintinnopsis kofoidi . (e) Favella taraikaensis .
(f)Eutintinnus tubulosus . (g) Helicostomella subulata . (h) H elicostomella fusiformis . (i) H elicostomella longa . Scale bar, 50 μ m.
Note that T . kofoidi may be a synonym of T . cylindrica (Agatha & Reidel - Lorj é 2006 ). For color version, see Plate 7.1 .

Comparative biology of tintinnid cysts 175
Fig. 7.2 Photographs of various fl ask - shaped cysts of marine ciliates (a – g) observed in sediments of northern Japan, and
a vegetative cell (h) of the oligotrich ciliate S trombidium chlorophilum identifi ed from protargol - stained cells and the cyst
(i) produced in a laboratory culture. Scale bars, 20 μ m (a – g), 50 μ m (h, i). For color version, see Plate 7.2 .
et al. 2007) . Thus, the gross morphology and compo- W ü nsch 1999 ; Reid 1987) . Cyst walls of some stichot-
sition, even among oligotrichs, varies considerably rich and peritrich ciliates comprise three layers termed
among different species. ectocyst, mesocyst, endocyst (ordered from outside
Some ciliate cysts have many spine or ridges evident to inside) and show a granular material layer located
using scanning electron microscopy (M ü ller and between the endocyst and the pellicle (e.g., Matsusaka

176 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
2006 ; Calvo et al. 2003 ). Little is known of the chemi- 1987 ; Kim & Taniguchi 1995 ), but this ability to resist
cal composition of the cyst wall, in general, the main strong acids is much lower than that of dinofl agellate
macromolecular cyst wall components are thought to cysts or ciliate cysts in soils and freshwaters (Corliss &
be proteins, glycoproteins, and carbohydrates based on Esser 1974 ), indicating that the chemical characteris-
terrestrial ciliate cysts (reviewed in Guti é rrez et al. tics of marine tintinnids and oligotrichs may not cor-
1990, 2003 ; Foissner 2005 ). respond to those of other ciliates.
In dinofl agellates, the morphology of cysts is also
very diverse with few features in common. As in cili-
ates, cyst morphology is usually very different from 7.3 ENCYSTMENT AND EXCYSTMENT
that of the vegetative cells. Among the dinofl agellates,
cysts of some species are well known because of inter- Encystment
est in the role of excystment in producing harmful
algal blooms that can infl uence fi sheries and human Cyst formation involves drastic changes in the outer
health. For example, protocols for the enumeration and inner structure of ciliate cells. Encystment is some-
of A lexandrium tamarense / catenella cysts have been times observed in laboratory cultures. Kamiyama
established, and distribution of the cysts has been (2011) recorded most of the encystment process of
investigated in coastal waters (Anderson et al. 1982 ; a tintinnid ciliate F avella taraikaensis in laboratory
Yamaguchi et al. 1995, 2002 ). cultures with time - lapse video connected to an
Specifi c changes in morphology of most ciliates inverted microscope ( http://feis.fra.affrc.go.jp/HABD/
during the course of cyst formation are commonly a TPS/Takashi_Kamiyama_video_fi le.html ). Recording
decrease in cell volume, retention of pigments, evacu- was started when a circular movement of F . taraikaen-
ation of storage products, resorbtion of cilia, and for- sis was observed within the lorica. A membranous
mation of a cyst wall (Guti é rrez et al. 1990, 2001 ). In structure around the cell, which became a cyst wall,
almost all species belonging to oligotrichs, stichotrichs, was produced after 30 minutes (Fig. 7.3 ). Then the
heterotrichs, peritrichs, colpodids, and haptorids, the circular movement of cytoplasm gradually slowed and
cyst volume of each species was less than that of the the membranous structure changed to a cyst wall.
vegetative cell, although the cyst volume of Strombid- When the cyst wall was formed, the cytoplasm dark-
ium oculatum was exceptionally 1.6 times larger than ened and a granular structure of the cell became
the volume of vegetative stage (Foissner et al. 2006 ). visible. After 6 hours of observation, movement of
Among marine dinofl agellates, decreases in cell volume cytoplasm stopped and the morphological change into
do not always occur. In Alexandrium tamarense , the cyst a cyst was apparently fi nished. As very few reports
is generally larger than the normal vegetative cells, exist, further work is needed to determine if encyst-
54 μ m × 32 μ m (Itakura & Yamaguchi 2005 ) com- ment varies in different tintinnid taxa.
pared with 26 – 38 μ m × 27 – 44 μ m (Fukuyo et al. Encystment of the oligotrich S trombidium conicum
1990 ) (compare with section “ Factors inducing encyst- has been observed in laboratory cultures (Endo
ment ” on pages 177 – 178 ). 2005 ), and it is likely that the encystment also starts
The retention of pigments in the cyst, hypothesized from circular movement of cytoplasm (Fig. 7.4 ). The
as perhaps serving as protection from ultraviolet - vegetative cell, which is conical in shape, changed
induced damage (Guti é rrez et al. 2001 ), may be into a sphere at the initiation of encystment. A fl ask -
uncommon in marine ciliates and dinofl agellates. shaped cyst wall was produced when the circular
However, some oligotrich and dinofl agellate cysts show movement of cytoplasm stopped. Then, some materi-
adhesion of particles to the surface of the cysts als, possibly contents of the food vacuoles and/or
(Yamaguchi et al. 1995 ; Reid 1987 ; Kim & Taniguchi materials originating from pigments, were excreted
1995 ), which could serve the same purpose. Adhesion through the opened papula. Finally, the encystment
of mineral particles may also promote sedimentation ended with the formation of the papula. In oligot-
of cysts and make them less susceptible to vertical richs, the encystment process can be rapid, taking
transport. Cysts can be very resistant. Morphological just 1 minute in Strombidium oculatum (Montagnes
characteristics of marine ciliate cysts persist for at least et al. 2002a ), or a few minutes in M eseres corlissi
a week in hydrochloric acid (Reid & John 1 978 ; Reid (Foissner et al. 2006 ).

Comparative biology of tintinnid cysts 177
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 7.3 Photographs of the encystment process of the tintinnid ciliate F avella taraikaensis observed in a laboratory culture.
Observation was started when the circular movement of the cell was observed within the lorica. A membranous structure
around the cell was produced after 30 minutes and then gradually changed into a cyst wall. The movement of the cell stopped
after 6 hours when the cyst formation was completed. To see the original video, go to http://feis.fra.affrc.go.jp/HABD/TPS/
Takashi_Kamiyama_video_fi le.html (from Kamiyama 2011 , with permission of the Plankton Society of Japan).
factors have been identifi ed: lack of prey, excess prey,
over- c rowding, accumulation of waste products from
the cells, and desiccation (evaporation of culture fl uid).
The most common exogenous trigger for terrestrial
ciliates is probably lack of prey (Matsusaka 2 006) .
However, factors acting in natural environments are
still largely unknown (Verni & Rosati 2011 ). Infor-
mation on the conditions or stimuli which induce
encystment in planktonic marine and freshwater cili-
ates (including tintinnids) is sparse.
E ncystment of the oligotrich Meseres corlissi in-
creased dramatically if temperature was below 20 ° C ,
while rarely occurring at more than 20 ° C (Foissner
et al. 2005 ). However, in cultures of tintinnids, encyst-
ment was observed with no apparent change in cul-
ture conditions (e.g., Paranjape 1980 ). Working with
Fig. 7.4 Schematic of the encystment process of marine oligotrichs, Endo & Taniguchi (2006) reported
Strombidium conicum observed in laboratory cultures as that environmental conditions such as prey concentra-
described in Endo (2005) . (a) Vegetative cell. (b, c) Cysts tion, temperature, and salinity were not critical factors
during wall formation. (d) Completion of cyst wall except for for encystment of the marine coastal oligotrich Strom-
papula. (e) Excretion of unnecessary cell contents. (f)
bidium conicum . These fi ndings are not inconsistent
Formation of papula.
with the factors for encystment of terrestrial ciliates as
described above. Also, they found that the ciliates in
Factors inducing encystment mixtures of several different strains formed cysts after
conjugation occurred in the culture. Furthermore, en-
F or terrestrial ciliates, the factors inducing encyst- cystment was recorded in the mixed clonal cultures
ment have been examined and reviewed in several after 15 – 17 binary fi ssions (Endo & Taniguchi 2006 ),
papers (Corliss & Esser 1974 ; Guti é rrez et al. 1990, suggesting that maturation or aging of the population
2001 ; Matsusaka 2006 ). In laboratory studies, various is necessary for encystment. Interestingly, excystment

178 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
of some cells was also observed after a few days of perature, light intensity, photoperiod, nutrient stress,
encystment in the same culture, implying that encyst- etc., with nutrient stress appearing to be the main
ment of S. conicum is not uniquely a reaction to unfa- factor inducing cyst formation (Pfi ester and Anderson
vorable environmental conditions. Encystment for 1987 ). For other phytoplankton taxa, nutrient deple-
S. conicum may be only a consequence of conjugation tion (especially nitrogen) is also a trigger for encyst-
and a phase for rejuvenation of the population (Endo ment or formation of resting spores in raphidophycean
2005 ). fl agellates and diatoms (McQuoid & Hobson 1996 ).
At present, it is unknown if encystment in tintinnids
is related to conjugation or not. Paranjape (1980)
noted encystment of Helicostomella subulata after the Factors inducing excystment
occurrence of conjugation in laboratory cultures and
also observed excystment under the same constant Excystment of ciliates including tintinnids may be
conditions after 8 – 9 weeks from fi rst encystment. In immediately triggered by environmental factors, as
strombidiid ciliates, M ü ller (2002) observed that all well as infl uenced by two types of endogenous “t rigger ” :
strains derived from excysted individuals readily formed inherent, such as a fi xed duration of the resting stage;
cysts, whereas few cyst forming strains were among or triggered, for example effects of temperature that
those isolated from lake water, and speculated that the cysts have experienced.
genetic variability within the population may create
variable responses to external triggers for encyst-
Environmental f actors
ment. The relationship between conjugation and
encystment, as well as possible genetic differences Like encystment, excystment of protists seems to be
among cyst - forming and non - cyst - forming strains, infl uenced by a variety of environmental factors.
merits further study. Among terrestrial ciliates, information on factors
We should note that cyst formation can be unrelated inducing excystment is sparse compared with that on
to conjugation. This is evident in perhaps the best - factors inducing encystment. At present, it appears
studied marine ciliate with regard to encystment and that dissolved substances infl uence excystment of ter-
excystment: the tide - pool oligotrich S trombidium ocula- restrial ciliates (Matsusaka 2006 ). In contrast, marine
tum (Faur é - Fremiet 1948 ; Jonsson, 1994 ; Montagnes and freshwater dinofl agellates, oligotrichs, and tin-
et al. 2002a, b ). In this species, encystment and excyst- tinnids have been relatively well studied for factors
ment follow a circa - tidal rhythm with encystment inducing excystment. Temperature is probably the
during high tides allowing the ciliate to avoid displac- most common factor inducing excystment of both
ment from the tide pool. The timing of the cyst cycle dinofl agellates and ciliates. For example, excystment of
continues in laboratory populations, indicating an dinofl agellates occurs within a species - specifi c tem-
endogenous trigger perature range termed the “ temperature window ” (Pfi -
Factors inducing encystment of dinofl agellates have ester & Anderson 1987 ), allowing prediction of the
been clarifi ed mainly for harmful algal bloom species, development of a population of a particular species. A
which display a variety of conjugation patterns and similar phenomenon likely applies to the excystment of
processes. In the case of Alexandrium tamarense , after tintinnids as well.
asexual growth of vegetative cells, two types of gamete Kamiyama & Aizawa (1992) examined effects of
(female and male) are produced and the conjugation temperature on excystment of tintinnid ciliates from
of both gametes takes place, anisogamous conjugation marine sediments incubated at different temperatures.
(Anderson 1998 ). The conjugated gametes become Although higher temperatures were associated with
the swimming zygote (planozygote). The planozygote overall higher excystment rates, there were species -
transforms into a dormant resting cyst. However, specifi c temperatures for excystment (Fig. 7.5 ). Inter-
planozygotes of all dinofl agellates do not always encyst. estingly, the temperature range suitable for excystment
Planozygotes of Scrippsiella trochoidea (Watanabe et al. for a given species corresponded to the range of near
1982 ) and G yrodinium instriatum (Uchida et al. 1996 ) bottom temperature when each plankton species ap-
occasionally develop directly into vegetative cells with- pears in the water column (Fig. 7.6 ). The results sug-
out going through a cyst stage. In dinofl agellates, a gested that water - column populations may be “ seeded ”
variety of factors have been examined such as tem- by excystment of each species.

Comparative biology of tintinnid cysts 179
)C°(
25 mottob
20 erutrepmet
15
raeN
10
5
120
100
80 Tintinnopsis kofoidi <15°C )1–1.dni(
60
40
20
0
140 ecnadnuba
120 Tintinnopsis directa
100 >20°C
80
60
40
20
0 nmuloc
1600
1400
1200
800 >15°C Eutintinnus tubulosus retaw
600
400
200
0 naeM
1000
900 10 –25°C
Tintinnopsis beroidea
400
300
200
100
0
M J J A S O N D J F M A
Fig. 7.6 Seasonal variation of near bottom temperature
(1 m above the bottom) and abundance of four tintinnid
species in Hiroshima Bay, the Seto Inland Sea of Japan.
Arrows denotes the period during which near - bottom
temperature was suitable for excystment of each tintinnid
species based on data in Fig. 7.5 (data from Kamiyama &
Aizawa 1992) . Note that T intinnopsis kofoidi may be a
synonym of T. cylindrica (Agatha & Reidel - Lorj é 2006 ).
20 ° C, whereas excystment of C yrtostrombidium boreale
was limited to between 10 and 15 ° C (Kim et al. 2002b ).
Furthermore, the temperature to which cysts were
Fig. 7.5 Effects of temperature on excystment of each
tintinnid species in marine sediments. Excystment indicates exposed infl uenced the ability and patterns of excyst-
the cumulative number of tintinnids excysted from ment of S. conicum , suggesting a triggered endogenous
sediments over 5 days. Vertical bars indicate the standard factor for excystment.
deviation of the mean (n = 3). (Data source: Kamiyama & Light as a factor has also been examined. Dark
Aizawa 1992 ). Note that T intinnopsis kofoidi may be a conditions decreased excystment of tintinnids and
synonym of T . cylindrica (Agatha & Reidel - Lorj é 2006 ). the oligotrich Strombidium conicum from sediments
(Kamiyama & Aizawa 1992 ; Kim & Taniguchi 1995 ).
Kamiyama et al. (1995) reported that the threshold
In marine oligotrichs, Kim & Taniguchi (1995, level of irradiance causing inhibition of excystment
1997) examined effects of environmental conditions was between 2.5 and 6.9 μ mol photon m − 2 s − 1 (Fig.
on excystment of cysts collected from sediments. Their 7.7 ). These studies showed, however, that some excyst-
results also indicated that the most important factor ment of ciliates occurred even under dark conditions,
triggering excystment is temperature. For example, implying that the effects of light on excystment are a
Strombidium conicum excysted in the range from 15 to supplementary or secondary factor (Kim & Taniguchi

180 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
12 )1–g.dni(
Irradiance
(μmol photon m–2 s–1)
10
136
p < 0.01
tnemtsycxe
8 29.7
6.9
6
2.5
4 evitalumuC
0.8
2 0
0
0 1 2 3 4 5
Incubation period (days)
Fig. 7.7 Effects of irradiance on tintinnid excystment from
marine sediments during 5 days of incubation. The
cumulative number of excystment for 5 days is signifi cantly
higher at irradiance at or above 6.9 μ mol photon m − 2 s − 1 than
at or below 2.5 μ mol photon m − 2 s − 1 (data from Kamiyama
et al. 1995 ).
1995 ). Alternatively, the exposure to weak light for a
few minutes during experimental manipulation used
in some studies possibly diminished any darkness -
related inhibition of excystment. Among phytoplank-
ton taxa, light can trigger excystment of, for example,
dinofl agellate cysts (Endo & Nagata 1984 ; Anderson
et al. 1987 ; Kremp & Anderson 2000 ). Light exposure Fig. 7.8 Effects of phytoplankton concentration on
for only a few seconds can stimulate germination of excystment of two tintinnid species, H elicostomella longa
phytoplankton cysts (Binder & Anderson 1986 ). and Eutintinnus tubulosus , from marine sediments. Original
The effect of oxygen concentration on excystment excystment data are from Kamiyama (1997a) .
has not been investigated in tintinnids, but has in the Phytoplankton ( Pavlova lutheri and Heterocapsa triquetra )
concentration was standardized as carbon concentration
oligotrich Strombidium conicum. Excystment rates were
based on cell concentration and cellular carbon content of
slightly lower at low dissolved oxygen concentration
each species, and the cellular carbon contents were
(about 4 ml l − 1 ) compared with a “ normal ” dissolved
estimated from cell dimension (Kamiyama & Arima 2001 )
oxygen concentration (about 10 ml l − 1 ). Low dissolved
and volume - carbon conversion factor (Verity et al. 1992 ).
oxygen concentration can inhibit germination of dino- Controls denote no addition of phytoplankton. Vertical bars,
fl agellates cysts (Montani et al. 1 995 ; Kremp & Ander- standard deviation (n = 3).
son 2000 ; Ishikawa & Taniguchi 1994 ). Low light
intensity and low dissolved oxygen concentration are
more likely to co - occur in the benthic zones, implying phytoplankton are an important factor promoting ex-
that cysts deep in the sediment (dark and anaero- cystment under suitable temperature conditions. Ka-
bic conditions) cannot excyst. Hence, suspension of miyama (1994a, 1997a) found that excystment of two
bottom sediments owing to turbulence or bioturbation species of hyaline tintinnids, Eutintinnus tubulosus and
is possibly an indirect trigger for excystment of dino- Helicostomella longa , from bottom sediments is signifi -
fl agellates and ciliates in coastal regions. cantly increased by co- incubation with several phyto-
Low nutrient concentrations delay germination of plankton species (Fig. 7.8 ), and found that this effect is
dinofl agellate cysts (Binder & Anderson 1986 ), indicat- owing to the presence of dissolved extracellular prod-
ing that solute concentrations can infl uence excyst- ucts of the phytoplankton.
ment. There is evidence for some tintinnid species For the oligotrich S trombidium conicum , excystment
showing that dissolved substances originating from was inhibited when an antibiotic substance was added

Comparative biology of tintinnid cysts 181
to surrounding seawater of the cysts and promoted of marine protists other than certain dinofl agellates.
when the extract of bacteria ( Escherichia coli ) was For example, Anderson & Keafer ( 1987) demonstrated
added, suggesting that bacterial action or a bacterial that a biological clock probably controls excystment of
product can infl uence excystment of S. conicum (Kim the dinofl agellate A lexandrium tamarense , because ger-
& Taniguchi 1995 ). Excystment of terrestrial ciliates mination of the cysts shows a seasonal cycle in an area
may be also stimulated by trace elements chemical where bottom environmental conditions (temperature
matters (e.g., Matsusaka 2006 ). At present, it is and day length) were seasonally invariant. Similarly,
unknown how the dissolved substances stimulate seasonal rhythms in excystment were observed in the
excystment of ciliates. Although a ciliate cyst is pro- oligotrich Pelagostrombidium sp. in lake water (M ü ller
tected by a wall that can resist strong acid and prevent 2002 ). As mentioned above, in the marine oligotrich
the penetration of some chemicals (Reid 1987 ), the Strombidium conicum, excystment is largely controlled
cyst wall nonetheless must be permeable to some by the temperature to which the cyst has been exposed.
dissolved substances. Alternatively, essential environ- However, a small portion of the cysts were unaffected
mental factors such as temperature may primarily by temperature, implying that some endogenous factor
change the permeability of the cyst wall, and then dis- may also exist (C. Nakaie, unpublished data).
solved substances and/or bacterial action possibly act It is also worth recalling that Faure - Fremiet (1948),
as additional factors. Jonsson (1994) , and Montagnes et al. (2002a) reported
that excystment and encystment of the oligotrich
Strombidium oculatum living in tide pools corresponds
Endogenous f actors
to the tidal rhythm. They considered encystment and
Excystment of protists can be controlled fully or partly excystment to be controlled by endogenous factors
by an endogenous rhythm. For example, among ter- because the tidal rhythm of encystment and excyst-
restrial ciliates, a fi xed period of the cyst stage seems to ment occurs i n vitro without any possible direct or indi-
characterize Burusaria truncatellau (Beers 1948 ) and rect tidal stimuli.
Histriculus cavicola (Nakamura & Matsusaka 1991 ). In Although temperature is an important factor trig-
the freshwater oligotrich Pelagostrombidium sp., cyst gering excystment of ciliates, it can also infl uence the
age, as well as temperature, is an important factor for endogenous rhythm of ciliate excystment, which is
excystment, so that excystment occurred without determined by temperature that the cysts have experi-
temperature stimulation in cysts older than 3 months enced. Kim & Taniguchi ( 1995, 1997) found that the
(M ü ller 2002) . Germination of some species of dino- excystment pattern (increase of cumulative success
fl agellate cysts requires a certain period of maturation rates of excystment during the incubation period) of
after encystment. They do not excyst during this period, Strombidium conicum varied seasonally in Onagawa
even if the environmental conditions are suitable. Bay, Japan. They found three patterns (Fig. 7.9 ). A
This period can be fi xed or determined by endogenous “ rapid pattern ” was observed in late summer to early
factors. Depending on the species, the duration ranges winter (September to January), in which excystment
from several weeks to several months and is infl uenced takes place abruptly within a few days and cumulative
by environmental conditions, especially temperature in success rate reaches more than 50%. A “ delayed
some cases. On the other hand, some species have fi xed pattern ” appeared from late winter to early spring
periods for maturation. The duration of the fi xed period (March), in which excystment is inactive during the
in Scrippsiella trochoidea is about 25 days and is not entire period of incubation (100 days). Finally, a “ tran-
infl uenced by temperature (Binder & Anderson 1986 ). sitional pattern ” occurred twice a year: once in mid -
For planktonic marine oligotrichs and tintinnids, winter (February) and again from spring to mid - summer
a cyst maturation period, if it exists, can be short. As (April – August), in which excystment proceeded stead-
described above, encystment and excystment of Heli- ily after about a 1 - month delay. This seasonality was
costomella subulata can be observed in the same culture observed cyclically during two years (Kim & Taniguchi
series, and Strombidium conicum excysted only a few 1997 ). The factor governing the seasonality in excyst-
days after encystment, suggesting no, or a very short, ment patterns was probably the temperature the cysts
resting period before excystment. experienced in the sediment (Kim & Taniguchi 1997 ).
So far, there are few reports clearly showing evi- Such a synchronized annual excystment pattern has
dence of a biological clock with regard to excystment been reported for cysts of the dinofl agellates S crippsiella

182 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
possible, sorting of cysts from sediment samples is
very time- consuming and hard work. Consequently, evitalumuC tnemtsycxe
September to
although there are some data on cyst abundance in
January
sediment or sediment trap samples based on cyst mor-
phology of oligotrichs (Kim 1995 ; M ü ller & W ü nsch
1999 ; M ü ller et al. 2002 ), information on horizontal
Days
distribution of ciliate cysts, including tintinnids, is
April to largely non - existent. erutarepmeT
August February The most probable number (MPN) method was
developed and used for enumeration of viable bacteria.
This method, also referred to as the “ extinction dilution
Season method ” , has been used for the enumeration of phyto-
plankton cysts in marine sediments (Imai et al. 1984 ;
March
Imai & Itakura 1991 ). Kamiyama (1996) applied this
method for the enumeration of viable tintinnid cysts
(here, defi ned as cysts that can be excysted in labora-
Fig. 7.9 Illustration of cyclic change in the excystment tory conditions) exploiting knowledge of environmen-
pattern of S trombidium conicum cysts under natural tal conditions known to promote the excystment of
conditions in Onagawa Bay, Japan. Three cumulative curves tintinnid cysts. This method is far easier and less labor -
denote the rapid pattern (September – January), transitional intensive than quantitative counting procedures. It
pattern (February, and April – August), and delayed pattern
allows estimation, however, only of viable cysts, not all
(March); data from Kim & Taniguchi (1997) .
cysts in sediment samples. Furthermore, the incuba-
tion conditions used may not be appropriate for all
species.
trochoidea (Kim & Han 2000 ) and Alexandrium tama- The MPN method was used to examine the distribu-
rense (Kim et al. 2002a ). Hence, seasonality of excyst- tional patterns of tintinnid cysts in Hiroshima Bay,
ment pattern responding to temperature is possibly Japan. The abundance of viable cysts was high in the
common to the other ciliates and dinofl agellates in sediments in the inner parts of the bay where vegeta-
coastal waters. tive cells occur in the highest concentrations (Fig.
7.10 ). Also, this area is the region where a close cou-
pling between cyst abundance and vegetative cells of
7.4 ECOLOGICAL FUNCTION OF CYSTS the harmful alga Heterosigma akashiwo is also observed,
suggesting that limited water exchange and high
Distribution of t intinnid c ysts concentrations of vegetative forms are linked to high
in c oastal s ediments abundances of cysts of these organisms in the sedi-
ment. In the northern parts of the bay, depletion of
Cysts with higher specifi c gravity than water rapidly dissolved oxygen occurs near the bottom in summer
sink to the bottom sediments. The distribution of cysts and high sulfi de concentrations are observed in sedi-
is generally associated with that of vegetative cells ment in this area (Itaoka & Tamai 1993 ). However,
serving as their source. Hence, the distribution pattern tintinnid cysts may survive such adverse condi-
and abundance of cysts (quantitative cyst maps) can tions and remain able to excyst when the environmen-
correspond with the density of the source populations tal conditions become favorable for the growth of
as well as its spatial distribution. For harmful algal tintinnids.
species, such patterns have been established (e.g., Densities of total viable tintinnid cysts as MPN
Anderson et al. 1982 ). However, there are very few observed in Hiroshima Bay ranged from 0.3 to 4.5
reports on the relationships between the distributions cysts per gram of sediment. In comparison, Kim (1995)
of cysts and vegetative cells of ciliates, although ciliate found that the maximum cyst densities of two tintinnid
cysts have been often found in seawater and sediment species Favella taraikaensis and H elicostomella subulata
traps. This is probably due to diffi culty of cyst identifi - were 7 and 13 cysts per gram of sediment, respectively,
cation of each ciliate species and, even if it were determined by direct count of the cysts in sediment

Comparative biology of tintinnid cysts 183
Tintinnid ciliates Aloricate ciliates
Tintinnopsis beroidea Hiroshima 10 Hiroshima
Helicostomella longa
5
Eutintinnus tubulosus
others Cysts g–1
1
20 '
5
Cysts g–1
1
0.2
34°
10 ' N
Japan Japan
20 ' 132° 30 ' E 20 ' 132° 30 ' E
Fig. 7.10 Abundance of viable cysts of tintinnid ciliate and aloricate ciliate in the sediment estimated by the MPN method
and the distributions in Hiroshima Bay, the Seto Inland Sea of Japan, in February1993 (data from Kamiyama 1996 ).
collected monthly from Onagawa Bay over 1.5 years. Although cysts are resistant, allowing survival in
The maximum density of either species in Onagawa the benthos, there a few reports from laboratory studies
Bay was higher than total cysts in Hiroshima Bay, suggesting that benthic fauna may consume cysts. The
which is a eutrophic embayment where planktonic tin- cysts of Alexandrium spp. are ingested both by a poly-
tinnids are abundant. This is probably due to the differ- chaete and a bivalve, with the bivalve reducing cyst
ence between the MPN method, which estimates only concentrations (Tsujino & Uchida 2004 ). Interestingly,
viable cysts, and the direct count method of all cysts. cysts found in fecal matter of both the polychaete and
Similar differences between cyst densities of Raphido- the bivalve excysted at rates similar to cysts that had
phycea and Chattonella spp., in sediments using both not been ingested. The eastern oyster ingests and
methods have been reported (Itakura et al. 1991; Imai apparently destroys a large variety of dinofl agellate
et al. 1998 ). To clarify the ecology of ciliates in marine cysts and undescribed “ c iliate cysts” (Persson & Smith
coastal waters, data on the horizontal distribution and 2009 ).
seasonal variation of species - specifi c cyst abundance
would be of great value. Ichinomiya et al. (2004)
proposed a simple detection method of ciliate cysts Infl uence of e xcystment and e ncystment
in sediments by exploiting the autofl uorescence of on p opulation d ynamics
glutaraldehyde - fi xed samples visible using epifl uo-
rescence microscopy. This may be a practical method The germination of cysts is thought to play a role as a
to estimate abundances of ciliate cysts in coastal trigger for population development of some dinofl agel-
regions, if ciliate cysts can be reliably distinguished late species (see, for example, Steidinger 1975 ). Such a
and identifi ed. role for bloom initiation may apply to the excystment

184 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
of ciliates as well. However, excystment may not be of encystment during population development, before
necessarily a major infl uence on population dynamics, peak density is reached, is a reasonable strategy to
as excystment peaks of dinofl agellates are not consist- avoid near - future unfavorable conditions. In ciliates of
ently related to peak water column concentrations temperate areas, many species bloom in summer to
or population growth rates (Ishikawa & Taniguchi fall/autumn and over - winter as cysts. However, some
1996 ). Ultimately, population development in the species encyst during the period when conditions
water column depends on the growth of the vegetative appear suitable for population growth. S trombidium
cells. crassulum encysts in early summer when temperature
Based on the few existing reports on encystment of is increasing and prey appear to be abundant. Reid
ciliates, the relationships with population dynamics (1987) suggested that this strategy may serve to avoid
also appear inconsistent. Encystment of Helicostomella competition with other microzooplankton grazers
subulata occurred during the development of the popu- and crustacean predators (copepods). After the spring
lation bloom (Paranjape 1980 ; Kim 1995 ), whereas bloom, the abundance of copepods increases, but with
formation of F avella taraikaensis cysts peaked at the end a time - lag of about 30 days. During the intervening
of the bloom (Kim 1995 ). In laboratory experiments, period,S. crassulum populations can increase and then
encystment of Favella taraikaensis occurred when shift from active growth mode to an encystment stage
the population growth rates decreased (Stoecker et al. just before the copepod population increases. A similar
1983 ). These reports show that encystment of tintin- strategy for escaping from copepod predation may
nids can correspond with both peak population abun- explain the encystment of the freshwater oligotrich
dance and declining populations. Limnostrombidium viride after the spring bloom (Mü l ler
Quantitatively, a substantial part of the tintinnid & W ü nsch 1999 ). Although it is tempting to gener-
population can be implicated in encystment. In Bedford alize, it is worth recalling that there is little ecologi-
Basin (Nova Scotia, Canada) the cyst density of Heli- cal information on relationships between population
costomella subulata in the water accounted for up to dynamics of vegetative cells and cysts. Furthermore,
40% of the vegetative cells. The “ effi ciency of encyst- diverse responses of excystment and encystment to
ment ” (the ratio of cyst fl ux estimated from data of environmental factors appear to be characteristic of
sediment trap samples to concentration of vegetative ciliates and these differences may refl ect very different
cells) in Onagawa Bay, Japan, reached 40% for H. strategies.
subulata . In comparison, for the oligotrich S trombidium
capitatum , the peak value was 27% (Kim 1995 ). These
estimates suggest that the encystment can be an
important ultimate fate of a bloom population of 7.5 KEY POINTS
tintinnids or oligotrichs. However, once again, diverse
patterns exist. In the oligotrich S trombidium conicum , 1. Historical overview of tintinnid ciliate cysts. The
a dominant species in Onawaga Bay, cyst formation many kinds of tintinnid cyst in seawater and sediments
occurs at a very low rate, an effi ciency of only 0.07% which have been reported suggest that a cyst is prob-
(Kim 1995) . Furthermore, in the Pelagostrombidium ably a common life- history stage for coastal species,
population of Lake Mondsee, some individuals remain although early reports may have confused parasite
active throughout the winter months, whereas others development with cyst formation in some tintinnid
encyst in late fall/autumn (M ü ller et al. 2002 ). species.
All ciliates, including tintinnids, will fully exploit 2. Morphology of tintinnid cysts. Although a variety
their growth potential under suitable environmental of presumptive cyst types have been reported, excyst-
conditions (e.g., of temperature and prey availability) ment has been observed only in the fl ask - shaped cysts
and increase population density. Probably, the ulti- of Favella and cylindrical or spherical cysts formed by
mate goal is to exchange genes with other individuals Helicostomella , Eutintinnus , and Tintinnopsis .
through conjugation. Development of high popula- 3. Encystment. Based on observations of F avella ,
tion densities increases opportunities for conjugation. encystment begins with a rapid circular motion of the
However, if the ciliate population overruns its prey, it cell inside the lorica and complete cyst formation takes
will create unfavorable conditions of low prey concen- about 6 hours. Precise knowledge of factors inducing
tration. If encystment follows conjugation, occurrence encystment in tintinnids is lacking.

Comparative biology of tintinnid cysts 185
4. Excystment. Among environmental factors, temper- population (up to about 40%) can be implicated in
ature appears to be the most important. encystment.
5. Distribution of tintinnid cysts. Two methods are
used to estimate cyst abundance in sediment samples:
direct counts and a “ most probable number (MPN) ”
method. Direct counts enumerate both living and dead ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
cysts, whereas the MPN method, which relies on trig-
gering excystment, may underestimate concentrations Thanks are extended to Dr Toshikazu Suzuki (Nagasaki
of living cysts. University) for his identifi cation of Strombidium chlo-
6. Encystment of fi eld populations. Encystment of tin- rophilum by observation of protargol - stained samples,
tinnids can correspond with peak population abun- and to Dr Young - Ok Kim (Korean Ocean Research and
dance in the water column or declining populations. Development Institute) for her suggestion to explain
In either case, a substantial part of the tintinnid fl ask - like cysts of ciliates in sediment samples.

Chapter 8
Fossil Tintinnids
Jere H. Lipps 1 , Thorsten Stoeck2 , and Micah Dunthorn 2
1 John D. Cooper Archaeology and Paleontology Center, Santa Ana and University of
California Museum of Paleontology, Berkeley, CA, USA
2 University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
186

Fossil tintinnids 187
8.1 INTRODUCTION: A PAUCITY OF DATA presence of tintinnids in Proterozoic and Paleozoic
rocks cannot be predicted.
Ciliates are diffi cult to observe and interpret, even Known, extant tintinnids now number about 1200
when seen through the lenses of powerful microscopes. described species in 75 genera both in marine and
Although they have a relatively high number of mor- brackish - to freshwater environments (Agatha 2009 );
phological characters compared with other micro- only about 10 species live in freshwaters (Tappan
bial eukaryotes, this number is nevertheless extremely 1993 ). They occur in today ’ s oceans in fi ve separate
limited and their simplifi ed structures may easily be biotas: cosmopolitan occurrences of hyaline loricate
converged upon by distantly related lineages (Dunthorn forms, neritic occurrences of organic and agglutinated
& Katz 2008 ). The processes of fossilization and the loricae in nearshore waters, warm - water containing
slow decay of time commonly affect those few morpho- the most numerous species of tintinnids, and boreal
logical characters that allow us to place fossils into and austral forms in high northern and southern areas
extant taxa with any reliable resolution, or even to (Chapter 10 ). Tintinnids may be especially abundant in
accurately identify them as ciliates. The very charac- nearshore eutrophic waters (Xu et al. 2011 ) and were
ters that we use to circumscribe extant species and even found in caves on land that had been penetrated
larger clades – the patterns of somatic and oral cilia, by marine waters (van Hengstum & Scott 2011 ).
the arrangements of kinetostome - associated microtu- Fossil tintinnids are almost exclusively marine and
bules and fi bers, and morphogenesis – are obscured or number far fewer described taxa. The fossils are diffi cult
lost in ciliate fossils. Soft cell parts may be preserved in to observe and interpret, and mistakes have commonly
ciliates, but only under exceptional conditions such as been made. Many of these so - called tintinnids from the
in amber (Ascaso et al. 2005 ; Mart í n - Gonz á lez et al. rock record have been described or reported from cross -
2008 ; Schmidt et al. 2001 ; Sch ö nborn et al. 1999 ; sections observed in petrographic thin - sections of the
Waggoner 1994 ). rock. There these fossils may resemble tintinnid cup -
Tintinnids, with their more easily fossilized loricae, like loricae, but so do cross - sections many other tiny
therefore offer the best hope of tracing ciliate evolution fossils or parts of fossils, especially in limestones of the
throughout the long history that is preserved in the Paleozoic and Mesozoic, making positive identifi ca-
rock record. However, these loricate fossils only contain tion trying, if not impossible. Others of these tintinnid
two pieces of evidence to both determine they are tin- fossils are demonstrably the remains of other kinds of
tinnid ciliates and to place them somewhere in the tin- eukaryotes that have undergone diagenetic changes.
tinnid taxonomy: their shape and their composition. Still others have thickly calcifi ed skeletons, unknown
With these two pieces of evidence, numerous paleon- in modern forms that have been assigned to other
tologists and taxonomists have analyzed putative tin- groups, although many workers accept them as tintin-
tinnid fossils since their discovery in the late 19th nids. For these reasons, fossil tintinnids have been con-
century by R ü st (1885) . These “ tintinnids ” have been troversial and hard to relate to modern forms and to
reported from Proterozoic through Recent marine the evolutionary history of the group and to ciliates in
deposits. The only other group of heterotrophic plank- general. Figure 8.1 shows all claimed tintinnid occur-
ton that has nearly such an early beginning is the Radi- rences in the geologic record. However, all such reports
olaria, which appeared in the early Cambrian period require special scrutiny. Extensive historical summa-
(Braun et al. 2007 ; Nazarov 1973 ) and diversifi ed ries of these analyses are found elsewhere (Tappan
throughout it (Dong et al. 1997 ; Won & Below 1999 ) & Loeblich 1968 ; Tappan 1993 ), and we summarize
to the present. Proterozoic microplankton chiefl y more recent work here.
includes a variety of acritarchs, which are cysts of
phytoplankton (Lipps 2006 ). Benthic heterotrophic
microbial eukaryotes may have been present in the 8.2 PROTEROZOIC TINTINNIDS:
Proterozoic (Huldtgren et al. 2011 ) and certainly NO EVIDENCE OF A BEGINNING
began to radiate in the Cambrian– O rdovician (Lipps
2006 ), but the other major groups of microplankton, Molecular clock analyses place the origin of ciliates
including diatoms, foraminifera, coccolithophorids, sometime in the Proterozoic (Berney & Pawlowski
and silicofl agellates, appeared in the Mesozoic era and 2006 ; Douzery et al. 2004 ; Parfrey et al. 2011 ; Wright
are extant today. Against this general background, the & Lynn 1997 ). If these estimates are correct, then

188 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 8.1 Timeline showing geological eons, eras, periods, and epochs relative to reports of fossil tintinnids (vertical arrows).
The lower panel shows the subdivisions of the Phanerozoic eon. The numbers indicate millions of years before present; note
the nonlinear time scale.
ciliate fossils dating from those ancient times are pos- that were not affected by any metamorphic processes;
sible. Because tintinnids appear to relatively evolved however, Li & Zhan (2006) and Li et al. (2009) are not
ciliates, we might not expect them to be found among clear about whether these unaltered areas in the rocks
the earliest plankton. However, three sets of fossils exist.
have been described and interpreted as Proterozoic tin- The second set of fossils (Figs. 8.1 and 8.3 ) comes
tinnids so far. from limestone in the Tsagaan Oloom Formation in
The oldest supposed fossil tintinnids were reported Mongolia, dating to 635 – 715 MYA (Bosak et al. 2011 ).
from the very old (Figs. 8.1 and 8.2 ) Mesoproterozoic Many of the over 100 organic fossils appear fl ask -
Huangmailing Formation, China, dated at 1600 shaped with an apical blunt - end collar, tapering to a
million years ago (MYA) (Li & Zhan 2006 ; Li et al. bowl - shaped base. However, in some of the fi gures
2009 ). Eight species described in six genera have the (Bosak et al. 2011 ), the fossils are not fl ask - shaped;
general shape of unaltered and undistorted modern rather, the basal end looks like a slightly larger version
tintinnid loricae (Fig. 8.2 ). If these are truly tintinnid of the apical blunt end (Fig. 8.3b ). On the surface of
fossils, then the date for the origins of ciliates would some of the fossils are alveolar spheroids (not to be
be pushed back much further in time than any molecu- confused with the fl attened alveolar sacs found in
lar clock estimate, and would imply an even older ciliate cell membranes) that are 2 – 5 μ m in diameter;
origin for the ciliates in general. However, because these spheres are potentially similar to those found
they come from high - grade metamorphic rocks, in some tintinnids during lorica formation (Gold &
termed “ granulite ” and “ leptite ” by Li & Zhan (2006) Morales 1976b ).
and Li et al. (2009) , these specimens should have been An additional character shape described from these
affected to some degree by metamorphism. Given the fossils is the central invaginations in the apical collars
absence of any of those kinds of metamorphic effects, (Fig. 8.3 c) that are “ consistent with a cemented or col-
these so - called fossils are more likely to be contami- lapsed aperture ” (Bosak et al. 2011 ). Presumably, they
nates or mineral shards from the metamorphic rock are composed of the same organic material as the rest
itself. They could also have come from parts of the rock of the fossils. However, in extant tintinnids, no such

Fossil tintinnids 189
element not found in extant ciliates without aggluti-
nated loricae; whether this silicon was included during
the fossilization process is not known. Given that extant
tintinnids do not have central invaginations of the
collar of their loricae and silicon is lacking in non -
a gglutinated species, these fossils are unlikely to be
tintinnids. In addition, given the lack of such central
invaginations in the tests of testate amoebae, reliable
taxonomic placement within the eukaryotes is cur-
rently impossible.
T he youngest set comes from the 580 MYA Wengan
Phosphate Member of Doushantuo Formation of China
(Figs. 8.1 and 8.4 ). These rocks, formerly thought to
be marine but now considered a lake deposit (Bristow
Publisher's Note:
et al. 2009 ), preserve an array of microfossils said to
Image not available
include sponge and other smaller animal embryos and
in the electronic edition
larval bilaterians (Chen et al. 2 009) ; embryonic stages
larger than 16 cells were attributed to taphonomic
factors that eliminated them, perhaps because of their
fragility (Dornbos et al. 2005 ). These so - called animal
embryos are neither animals nor embryos, but more
likely represent other microbial eukaryotes (Huldtgren
et al. 2011 ). The bilaterian fossils have been dismissed
as well because the putative cell layers are diagenetic
overgrowths on interior and exterior surfaces (Bengt-
son & Budd 2004 ) likely of and on acritarch cysts
(Dunthorn et al. 2010 ). From these same rocks, two
new tintinnid taxa, Eotintinnopsis pinniforma and
Wujiangella beidoushanese (Fig. 8.4 ), were described
based on single specimens (Li et al. 2007 ). These fossils
Fig. 8.2 Putative tintinnid fossils from the 1600 MYA were interpreted as putatatively cup- s haped organisms
Mesoproterozoic Huangmailing Formation of China from Li
with organic loricae, characters that are consistent
& Zhan (2006) and Li et al. (2009) . (a) A lpingella acuminata ;
with extant tintininids. However, their similarity to tin-
scale bar, 300 μ m. (b) E utintinnus frakmoi ; scale bar, 1 mm.
tinind shape ends there. In the specimen of Eotintin-
nopsis (Fig. 8.4 a – c), multi - tiered apical and a subapical
feather- l ike structures were described. These apical fea-
central - invagination - shaped structures occur in or on tures are unknown in any extant ciliate, and, like the
the loricae, and the collars are broadly opened to allow misidentifi ed bilaterians from the same rocks, this fossil
the cells to feed. Although closing apparatuses occur likely represents the remains of two acritarchs that
in some tintinnids such asCodonella, these structures were altered, distorted, and compacted together during
are found at the base of the collar, and their mem- and after fossilization (Dunthorn et al. 2 010) . Of the
branelles, which are 0.1 – 0.2 μm thick, are arranged two putative Doushantuo fossil tintinnids, Wujiangella
like an iris diaphragm (Agatha 2 010a) . The mem- (Fig. 8 .4d – f ) is the most similar to extant ciliates (Li
branes may be secreted by the cell, but their composi- et al. 2 007) . However, its so- c alled somatic cilia are
tion is different from the loricae. Such thin membranes twice as wide as they should be, and they lack any
are unlikely to be preserved in any fossil. The overall kinety arrangement that would normally be found in
organic compositions of the Mongolian fossils (Bosak extant tintinnids (Dunthorn et al. 2 010) . Rather than
et al. 2011 ) do support a tintinnid relationship. In being cilia, the projections on Wujiangellai are most
addition, silicon was also found in these fossils, an likely spines on diagenetically and taphonomically

Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 8.3 Putative tintinnid fossils from the 635 – 715 MYA Tsagaan Oloom Formation of Mongolia from Bosak et al. (2011) .
(a, b) Side view with defl ated round bowls, constricted necks, and centrally invaginated collar. a is ~ 130 μ m wide; b is 70 μ m
long. (c) View of apical central invagination. c is 75 μ m long. © Geological Society of America.
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 8.4 Putative tintinnid fossils from the 580 MYA Wengan Phosphate Member of Doushantuo Formation of China from Li
et al. (2007) . (a) E otintinnopsis pinniforma , longitudinal section; scale bar, 50 μ m. (b) Close up of feather - like membranelles on
E. pinniforma ; scale bar, 10 μ m. (c) Reconstruction of E . pinniforma .(d) Wujiangella beidoushanese , longitudinal section; scale bar,
50 μ m. (e) Close up of cytostome and cytopharynx of W . beidoushanese ; scale bar, 10 μ m. (f) Reconstruction of W .
beidoushanese ; c, somatic cilia; cb, cell body; cp, cytopharynx; cs, cytostome; ft, feather - like membranelles; l, lorica; m,
membranelles; p, peduncle. © The Geological Society, London.

Fossil tintinnids 191
degraded acritarchs (Dunthorn et al. 2010 ). A third Africa (Chennaux 1968 ), the Silurian of Spain (Hermes
ciliate, reportedly a suctorian, was also described from 1966 ), the Lower Devonian of North Africa (Cuvillier
one specimen asYonyangella ovalis . It too is a diageneti- & Sacal 1963 ) and of Canada (Murray & Taylor 1965 ),
cally and taphonomically altered acritarch. This evi- and the Mississippian of Teverga in northern Spain
dence and the freshwater depositional environment of (Cuvillier & Barreyre 1964 ). From only one of these
the Doushantou Formation indicate that these fossils occurrences, the Devonian, was a new genus and
are not tintinnids: rather they are acritarch cysts of species described. Thus Tappan & Loeblich (1968) ,
algal microplankton. although noting the reports of tintinnids in Ordovi-
Thus, given the alternative interpretations by cian, Silurian, and Devonian, did not include them in
Dunthorn et al. (2010) and herein of the fossils of Li their review because new taxa were not described. The
et al. (2007) , Bosak et al. ( 2011), Li & Zhan (2006) , Mississippian occurrence (Cuvillier & Barreyre 1964 )
and Li et al. (2009) , no solid evidence of Proterozoic are not tintinnids and are more likely calcispheres
tintinnids or other ciliates comes from the Precam- (Tappan & Loeblich 1968 ), which are spherical calcite
brian rock record. Darwin ’ s dilemma of the lack of objects found commonly in carbonate rocks and
fossils for this ancient age (Schopf 2001 ; Knoll 2004 ) believed to be algal in origin. The other records include
therefore still holds for at least the ciliates. If there are two - dimensional cross - sections of spheres and cups,
tintinnid fossils from this ancient time, they have yet to some with an opening and fl ange. Although the cross-
be discovered. sections do resemble those of Mesozoic calpionellids,
they have not been confi rmed as tintinnids by the study
of free specimens. So far, no Paleozoic tintinnids are
8.3 PALEOZOIC TINTINNID REPORTS: known with certainty.
TOO THIN TO KNOW
In the Phanerozoic eon, tintinnid fossils have been 8.4 MESOZOIC TINTINNIDS AND
reported rarely in Paleozoic rocks, but are much more CALPIONELLIDS: SAME SHAPE,
commonly reported in the Mesozoic era where they DIFFERENT COMPOSITION
can be quite abundant. Whether or not any of these
fossils are tintinnids is much debated. Tintinnids and the calpionellids have been described
Tintinnids have been reported from thin sections in from the upper Triassic to lower Cretaceous sedimen-
Ordovician carbonate rocks (Fig. 8.5 ) of the Sahara of tary rocks from both onshore and offshore settings
Fig. 8.5 The presence of tintinnids in the Ordovician is based primarily on a report by Chennaux (Tappan & Loeblich 1968 ).
He documented what appears to be a fossilized tintinnid lorica from an Ordovician formation in Algeria. The right panel (a) is
brightfi eld image of a thin section, the left panel (b) a polarized light view. Only one specimen was found and there were there
no co - occurring fossils of any type. Images from Chennaux (1968) with micrometer scale bar added.

192 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
(Tappan 1993 ). These tintinnids and calpionellids are However, no evidence exists for such an evolutionary
used or have potential for biostratigraphic correla- scenario linking calpionellids with tintinnids.
tion with their parent rocks throughout the Tethyan Whatever calpionellids are – tintinnids or not – they
Sea (Tappan 1993 ), being widespread from Australia do make excellent markers for use in biostratigraphy of
(Brunnschweiler 1951 ) through Russia and Asia upper Jurassic to lower Cretaceous rocks (Gr ü n & Blau
(Bugrova 2003 ), Iran and Morocco (Benzaggagh et al. 1997 ; Remane 1985 ). Over the years, several schemes
2010 ) in the east and across the Atlantic Ocean to of zonal and subzonal divisions using calpionellids
Mexico in the west (Colom 1955, 1965 ), and in South have been proposed (e.g., Altiner & Ö zkan 1991 ;
Dakota, Wyoming, and Colorado (Eicher 1965 ) in Cantu - Chapa 1996 ; Gr ü n & Blau 1996 ; Le H é garat &
central USA. Some of these fossils resemble modern Remane 1968 ; Pop 1976 ; Remane 1963 , 1964 , 1971 ;
species in their morphology and construction materi- Remane et al. 1986 ). Gr ü n & Blau ’ s (1997) latest cal-
als (Fig. 8.6 ). However, central in these debates about pionellid biochronology distinguishes six zones and 19
what fossils are tintinnids are the calcareous calpi- subzones (these zones also correlate with zonation
onellids. Calpionellids range from the late Tithonian, developed for Mediterranean ammonites).
in the upper Jurassic, to the early Valanginian, in the Genuine tintinnids, defi ned by having agglutinated
lower Cretaceous (Tappan 1993 ; Tappan & Loeblich loricae, occur in the Jurassic and Cretaceous (Tappan
1968 ; Remane 1985 ). Because of their cup - shaped 1993 ). They have only one occurrence in the Jurassic
loricae, calpionellids have commonly been assumed (R ü st 1885 ) but are abundant in the shallow, neritic
to be tintinnids. With this view, some taxonomists waters of the Cretaceous mid - continental seaway that
have interspersed calpionellids into modern families fl ooded a central corridor through the center of North
based on lorica shape (Kofoid & Campbell 1939 ; America from the Gulf of Mexico to the Arctic Ocean.
Campbell 1954 ; Tappan & Loeblich 1968 ; Corliss In this environment, agglutinated tintinnids (Fig. 8.6 )
1979 ; Lynn 2008 ). Others have separated the calpi- were abundant (Eicher 1965 ).
onellids into their own tintinnid subgroup (see, e.g.,
Bonet 1956 ).
The central problem with identifying and describing
calpionellids as tintinnids – either interspersing them 8.5 CENOZOIC TINTINNIDS: SPARSE
into extant families or in their own taxon – is the com-
position of their loricae. Although all extant tintinnids Tintinnids have been described from Paleocene, Eocene,
have organic or agglutinated loricae (Chapter 3 ), cal- and Oligocene marine deposits, and from Pleistocene
pionellid fossils are composed of calcite (Tappan 1993 ). lake sediments of the Cenozoic over the past 50 or
Calpionellid fossils would then include the so - called so years by several authors (summarized by Tappan
calcareous tintinnids in the Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and 1993 ; Bignot & Poignant 2010 ). Over 60 species (Figs
Cenozoic. No modern classifi cation separates the calpi- 8.7 – 8.9 ) occur in the Paleogene rocks from the Gulf
onellids into their own group. Coast of the USA, across Europe from Spain to Poland
Colom (1934, 1948) suggested that calcite may and Romania, and in Ukraine, Uzbekistan, and Turk-
have replaced the original organic material during the menistan (Tappan & Loeblich 1968 ; Tappan 1993 ;
fossilization process, but this seems highly unlikely as Bugrova 1983, 2003 ; Bignot & Poignant 2010 ). These
it would have had to occur in many fossils from many occurrences are all in the ancient Tethys Seaway, an
different rocks from many parts of the world (Tappan equatorial ocean that extended from the modern Gulf
1993 ). This difference in lorica composition between of Mexico region, across southern Europe and Asia, to
extant ciliates and fossil calpionellids led Remane Australia and southeast Asia. This seaway gradually
(1971, 1985) to declare that calpionellids are not tin- closed as plate tectonic motions moved Africa and
tinnids and not even ciliates. India into Europe and Asia, causing mountains to
With the current evidence, Remane ’ s (1971, 1985) form, and oceanography to change in the rest of the
view of a non - ciliate origin of calpionellids seems to be world. The Tethys Seaway was a unique warm - water
the most likely. That does not mean that sometime in environment containing an abundance of fossil plank-
the Jurassic a lineage of tintinnids evolved from making tic and benthic organisms.
organic loricae to calcareous ones. This monophyletic The tintinnids described from the ancient Tethyan
group would then have gone extinct in the Cretaceous. marine rocks are mostly calcareous cup - shaped cones

Fossil tintinnids 193
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 8.6 Lower and Upper Cretaceous agglutinated tintinnid loricae from Colorado and Wyoming, USA, referred to modern
genera (from Plate 1 of Eicher 1965 ). (a, b) D icloepella borealis . (c, d) C odonella bojiga . (e, f) C oxiella coloradoensis . (g, h) C oxiella
atricollium . (i, j) T intinnopsis parovalis . (k, l) T intinnopsis ampullula . The assignment to modern genera is considered tentative
here. Courtesy of Micropaleontology Project.
regions (Tappan & Loeblich 1968 ) that are not consid-
ered pseudarcellinids. Because no modern species of
tintinnids are known to secrete CaCO , these also are
3
unlikely to be tintinnids. The cups are mostly quite
shallow and not deep; most are wider than they are
long. Many of these might be larval - shelled inverte-
brates or other microbial eukaryotes.
8.6 ORGANIC AND AGGLUTINATED
PHANEROZOIC FOSSILS: THE MOST
LIKELY CANDIDATES
Fig. 8.7 Pseudoarcellinid (Paleogene in age) cup
morphology showing fl at cups with various protruberances. Tintinnids with organic loricae or loricae aggluti-
Reprinted from Bignot, G. & Poignant, A. ( 2010 ) Les nated with foreign particles gathered from the water
Pseudarcellinae, nouvelle sous - famille des Codonellidae
column (Chapter 3 ), such as with coccoliths, silt, and
(Tintinnida) – le genre P seudarcella et l ’ esp è ce Pseudarcella
clay attached to it, are abundantly preserved (Fig.
rhumbleri Spandel, 1909 – description de nouvelles esp è ces.
8.11 ) in some neritic marine sediments (Harman
Revue de Micropaléontologie, 53, 107 – 119. Figure 4, with
1 972; Echols & Fowler 1 973) , but they are uncom-
permission from Elsevier.
mon in the fossil record. This dichotomy indicates
that loricae cannot readily survive the processes asso-
with various shapes, invaginations, and protrubrances ciated with lithifi cation of sediments into rocks. The
(Figs 8.8 and 8.9 ) that have been placed in the new oldest known tintinnid with an agglutinated organic
subfamily Pseudarcellinae of the tintinnid family lorica occurs in the Jurassic (Rust 1 885) . Others,
Codonellidae (Bignot & Poignant 2010 ). Other similar placed in modern genera although this is likely incor-
forms (Fig. 8 .10) also occur in Paleogene rocks in these rect, are abundant in the Cretaceous (Eicher 1 965) .

Fig. 8.8 Pseudoarcellinids from France and Belgium, reprinted from Bignot, G. & Poignant, A. ( 2010 ) Les Pseudarcellinae,
nouvelle sous - famille des Codonellidae (Tintinnida) – le genre P seudarcella et l ’ esp è ce P seudarcella rhumbleri Spandel, 1909
– description de nouvelles esp è ces. Revue de Micropal é ontologie, 53, 107 – 119. Plate 1, with permission from Elsevier . 1 – 4,
Pseudoarcella rhumbleri , diameters = 380 μ m; height = 250 μ m. 5 – 8, P . szczechurae , large diameter = 330 μ m; small
diameter = 270 μ m; height = 250 μ m. 9 – 13, P . belgica , diameter = 260 μ m; height = 190 μ m. 14, 15, P . konenkovae ,
diameter = 450 μ m; height = 260 μ m.

Fossil tintinnids 195
A gap in the occurrence of agglutinated loricae exists
after the Cretaceous until they reappear in sediment
cores that penetrate the Upper Pleistocene (Echols &
Fowler 1 973) . Agglutinated and organic loricae are
common in modern biotas in both open- o cean and
neritic environments.
8.7 CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES
T he calcareous calpionellids and other forms may not
be tintinnids at all. This view was common in the past
when calpionellids were compared with a variety
of microbial eukaryotes including thecameobians,
foraminifera, and others. Some, especially species of
Fig. 8.9 Three views of P seudoarcella sp. (length = 170 μ m;
Pseudarcella , could even be small or larval invertebrate
height = 230 μ m) from the Chattian of the Aquitain Basin
shells. Thus the reliable fossil record of tintinnids that
(reprinted from Bignot, G. & Poignant, A. (2010) Les
can be used in calibrating molecular phylogenetic
Pseudarcellinae, nouvelle sous - famille des Codonellidae
analyses is sparse and very incomplete. The fi rst
(Tintinnida) – le genre P seudarcella et l ’ esp è ce Pseudarcella
rhumbleri Spandel, 1909 – description de nouvelles esp è ces. organic tintinnid from the Jurassic appears to be a fully
Revue de Micropal é ontologie, 53, 107 – 119. Plate 2, fi gs 12, developed form, thus indicating a previous undiscov-
14, 15, with permission from Elsevier). ered history.
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 8.10 Tytthocorys coronula from the Upper Eocene at Jackson, Mississippi, USA (from plate 167, fi gs 1 – 3 in Tappan &
Loeblich 1968 ). These specimens are of secreted CaCO and show a characteristic tintinnid shape of the bowls
3
(width = ~ 200 μ m) with aboral horns . © Society for Sedimentary Geology.

196 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 8.11 Agglutinated tintinnid loricae from modern sediments from the continental shelf off northern Siberia, eastern
Alaska, the Kara Sea, and the shelf off Washington and Oregon (Plate 1 from Echols & Fowler 1973 ). Similar forms
(Tintinnopsis fi mbriata ) are found in Pleistocene sediments cored from the Chukchi Sea, Arctic Ocean. (1 – 8, ~ 85 μ m wide.
9 – 13, 61 – 68 μ m wide. 10, 50 μ m wide.) Courtesy of Micropaleontology Project.
Molecular data suggest that tintinnid classifi cations provide a way to determine which of these conver-
suffer from morphologic convergence of forms with gences and divergences may be deciphered. Indeed,
dissimilar sequences, and some forms that are morpho- because of these molecular sequence data, no classifi ca-
logically quite similar have distinct molecular sequences tion of the fossil tintinnids is attempted in this summary.
(Chapter 3 ). The fossil record of tintinnids does not Any such classifi cation would be quite artifi cial.

Fossil tintinnids 197
8.8 KEY POINTS be clarifi ed and better documented with positive deter-
minations that fi ll in the history of the group.
1. Fossils normally leave few clues to their ciliate
origin, except their shape and composition.
2. All putative tintinnids from the Precambrian and ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Proterozoic differ in shape, composition, or both from
all known extant tintinnids, and are not tintinnids. We thank the editors of this book, especially John
3. Calpionellids are likely not tintinnids because their Dolan and Sabine Agatha. We also thank Alberto E.
composition differs from all known extant tintinnids. Pati ñ o Douce, University of Georgia, for comments on
4. The history of reliable tintinnids in the rock record the Mesoproterozoic Huangmailing Formation fossils.
is very incomplete, starting even with the fi rst occur- Funding came from the Alexander von Humboldt
rence in the Jurassic, which indicates an even longer Foundation to M.D., and the Deutsche Forschungsge-
history. meinschaft (grant STO414/3 - 1) to T.S. This is Univer-
5. Tintinnid classifi cations of both modern and fossil sity of California Museum of Paleontology publication
species are artifi cial and do not show evolutionary number 2033.
relationships.
6. Not only is more work necessary on the molecular
phylogenetics of tintinnids, the fossil record must also

Chapter 9
Tintinnids in
Microzooplankton
Communities
George B. McManus and Luciana F. Santoferrara
University of Connecticut, Groton, CT, USA
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
198

Tintinnids in microzooplankton communities 199
9.1 ECOLOGY OF MICROZOOPLANKTON (1965) proposed a formal size - based classifi cation of
plankton (Table 9.1 ). Sieburth et al. (1978) refi ned the
Microzooplankton as a functional trophic system by adding a category for “ femtoplankton ”
category (principally viruses), and pointed out that the smallest
size groups (pico - , nano - , and microplankton) con-
Depending on one ’ s perspective, tintinnids can be tained both heterotrophs and autotrophs. Although
studied for their taxonomic affi liation (they are spiro- they introduced other terms to account for this (e.g.,
trich ciliates), their type of metabolism (they are het- “ protozooplankton ” , “ bacterioplankton ” , etc.), many
erotrophs), their mode of living (they are members of contemporary planktologists simply use an additional
the plankton), or any one of several other categories prefi x to indicate trophic status, as in “ microphyto-
to which they may be assigned. In this chapter we plankton ” for autotrophs and “ microzooplankton ” for
will consider them as members of a group called the heterotrophs. The original Dussart categories and the
microzooplankton. This category was created by ocea- consensus contemporary system are shown in Table
nographers to include all “ animal - like ” organisms 9.1 . The great majority of tintinnids are in the micro-
(i.e., they have to eat to survive) that drift with ocean plankton size category and, as strict heterotrophs, are
currents and are in the size range of 20 – 200 μ m. hence designated as microzooplankton.
Some tintinnids are larger than this, and many have Long before Dussart formalized the system, early
long slender shapes that make assignment of a size planktologists introduced the categorization of plank-
somewhat arbitrary. But given that the original intent ton by size (Lohmann 1911 ), but systematic attempts
of creating the microzooplankton as a group for study to quantify abundances and biomasses of microzoo-
was to include all the zooplankton that would pass plankton in relation to phytoplankton and larger
through a standard 200 μ m mesh plankton net, it is zooplankton began in earnest during the 1960s and
safe to say that virtually all tintinnids are members of 1970s (Beers & Stewart 1969 ; Sorokin & Kogelschatz
this group. 1979 ; Burkill 1982 ; Sorokin et al. 1985 ; Sorokin,
Realizing that taxonomic affi liations among plank- et al. 1998 ). The rationale for using size categories in
tonic organisms were often less useful indicators of plankton studies is both practical and theoretical. On
ecological function than their relative sizes, Dussart the one hand, plankton nets and membrane fi lters
Table 9.1 Size categorization of plankton groups.
Size range (μ m) Dussart(1965) category Current consensus usage Organisms included
0.02–0.2 Not included Femtoplankton Viruses
0.2–2 Nannoplankton Picoplankton Heterotrophic and
autotrophic prokaryotes;
the smallest protists
2–20 Ultramicroplankton Nanoplankton Flagellates and other
small protists
20–200 Microplankton Microplankton Autotrophic and
heterotrophic protists;
some metazoan larvae
200–2000 Mesoplankton Mesoplankton Copepods and other small
metazoans
>2000 Megaplankton Macroplankton Larger crustaceans; some
jellyplankton

200 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
with precise pore sizes allow us to easily separate size Box 9.1 ). The allometric arguments remain important
classes of organisms into fractions that can subse- to our understanding of the structure of planktonic
quently be weighed, counted under the microscope, or food webs because methods for the direct measurement
used for experiments; on the other hand, there is a of microzooplankton grazing, growth, and respiration
large body of theory going back to Elton ’ s “ pyramid of in natural assemblages are limited, and they led to a
numbers ” (Elton 1927 ) that describes the dependence great increase in the number of studies focused on
of abundance and metabolism, including feeding, res- micro zooplankton from the 1970s through the
piration, and growth, on organism size (Platt 1985 ; present. For this chapter, we will review this material,
Fenchel 1987 ). The latter arguments and supporting emphasizing studies of natural communities in which
observations have been used to suggest that zooplank- the role of tintinnids within the microzooplankton is
ton of 20 – 200 μ m size (microzooplankton) are, in specifi cally quantifi ed. Other chapters in this volume
aggregate, quantitatively more important as consum- focus on the many laboratory studies of feeding,
ers and remineralizers of primary production than the growth, and mortality in tintinnids (see Chapters 3 , 5 ,
larger and better - studied mesozooplankton (see, for and 6 ). Seasonal changes in tintinnid communities are
example, Johannes 1965 ; Sieburth et al. 1978 ) (See treated in Chapter 10 .
Box 9.1 An a llometric a rgument for the i mportance of the m icrozooplankton
Relationship between body size and metabolism rate, but show that the exponent is closer to the ¾
I = Ingestion rate = grams eaten/grazer/day power.
B = body mass = grams/grazer In the present case, if we are trying to evaluate the
a = a constant relative importance of microzooplankton and mesozoo-
I = aB0.75 plankton in ingesting phytoplankton, we have to con-
note: log(I) = log(a) + 0.75 log(B) sider both relative metabolic rates and abundances. noitsegnI
Bcop = 1000 Bcil For example, if microzooplankton are about one - tenth
etar
the size of mesozooplankton in linear dimension (20 –
Icop = aBcop0.75
200 μ m compared with 200– 2000 μ m; here represented
Body mass
= a(1000Bcil)0.75 as a ciliate and a copepod, respectively), then they
would individually be about one - thousandth the
= 10000.75aBcil0.75 biomass (B = 1000 times B ). In the example above,
cop cil
= 178 aBcil0.75 = 178 Icil that means that I , the ingestion rate of an individual
c op
copepod mesozooplankter (the elephant), is 178 times
that of an individual ciliate microzooplankter (I , the
cil
bird in this case). However, because microzooplankton
It is well known that physiological rates increase with abundance in coastal waters is about 1000- fold greater
body mass in a decelerating fashion, as in the graph than that of mesozooplankton (10 3 – 104 individuals per
above. A larger animal such as an elephant eats more liter compared with 1– 10 individuals per liter), the impli-
than a bird in absolute amount of food, but less as a cation is that the two size classes have about equal
fraction of its body mass. This probably has to do with biomass in aggregate (the 1000 times smaller ciliate
the fact that many physiological processes (e.g., gas is 1000 times more abundant). Thus, although the indi-
or heat exchange) are surface- related, whereas body vidual copepod eats 178 times as much, in aggregate
mass is volume- related; so metabolism increases as a the 1000 times more abundant ciliates eat over fi ve
square of linear dimension, while mass increases as times as much total phytoplankton. Note that the
its cube. The consequent argument that physiological same argument could be made for other metabolic
rates should increase as the 2 / 3 power of mass has been processes, including respiration, excretion, etc., all of
referred to as “ Rubner’ s Law ” (Fenchel 1 987 ; Fenchel which are just as critical for food web ecology as inges-
& Finlay 1 983 ). Observations confi rm the decelerating tion rate.

Tintinnids in microzooplankton communities 201
Composition of microzooplankton being an autotroph, though it does require cryptophyte
assemblages food to replace its enslaved chloroplasts (Gustafson
et al. 2000 ; Johnson et al. 2006 ). It now appears that
The microzooplankton can be divided into four broad there are multiple mixotrophic, as well as hetero-
groups that roughly correspond to phylum - level affi li- trophic, species within this group, and the ecological
ations: (1) ciliates, including the tintinnids; (2) dino- roles of the different species may diverge (Moestrup et
fl agellates and other large fl agellates; (3) rotifers; and al. 2012 ). Peritrichs and other particle - associated cili-
(4) the larvae of microcrustaceans, principally copepod ates are found in many marine environments attached
nauplii. The size fraction approach to studying ecology to large diaphanous aggregates (marine snow) and as
of plankton has some advantages, but it also obscures epibionts (Song & Wilbert 2002 ; Caron, et al. 1982 ).
biological differences among groups of organisms that They probably have been undersampled because of the
may employ different strategies for success in a pelagic rarity of large particles in the pelagic environment and
realm where food is dilute and predation pressure is the destruction of marine snow in net collections.
high. Thus, many investigators have focused on indi-
vidual groups within the microzooplankton and this
Dinofl agellates and o ther l arge fl agellates
has led, to a certain degree, to some divergent perspec-
tives on the overall role of microzooplankton in pelagic Dinofl agellates are the most problematic group in the
food webs. Although the subject of this chapter is tin- microzooplankton because the trophic roles of indi-
tinnids in the microzooplankton, we will try to balance vidual species are generally not known (Lessard & Swift
the approach by giving an overview including other 1986 ; Lessard 1 991 ). Although some groups are
members of the group. wholly heterotrophic (e.g., Protoperidinium spp.) it is
likely that most, if not all, dinofl agellates are capable
of ingestion (Stoecker 1999 ). Furthermore, it is clear
Ciliates
that individual species vary greatly over time in the
Ciliates have often been considered as the main com- relative importance of auto - and heterotrophic metab-
ponent of microzooplankton assemblages, largely olism, depending on environmental conditions (Bock-
owing to the conspicuousness of tintinnids and their stahler & Coats 1993 ; Adolf, et al. 2006 ; Smalley &
ability to survive concentration in plankton nets, as Coats 2002 ; Smalley, et al. 2003) .
well as the lack of appreciation for other microzoo- There have been several studies that compared
plankton groups, in particular heterotrophic dinofl ag- abundances of heterotrophic dinofl agellates to those of
ellates. Planktonic ciliate abundance and biomass is other microzooplankton groups (e.g. Verity et al. 1993,
usually dominated by the Spirotrichea subclasses Oli- 1996 ). In general, the most abundant strict hetero-
gotrichia and Choreotrichia (Montagnes & Lynn 1991 ; trophs are forms smaller than 20 μ m, probably bacte-
Pierce & Turner 1992 ; Fenchel 1988 ). The latter group rivores and grazers on the smallest phytoplankton
includes the tintinnids and some of their aloricate (Verity et al. 1996 ). Large heterotrophs, including
relatives, principally in the families Strobilidiidae and pallium feeders capable of ingesting prey much larger
Strombidinopsidae. A variety of other ciliates may be than themselves, appear to be most abundant during
represented in the plankton at times, especially in blooms of chain - forming diatoms (Sherr and Sherr
nearshore, shallow waters. These include Tiarina fusus 2008b ). A full understanding of the signifi cance of
and Balanion comatum (Prostomatea), which are not dinofl agellates as microzooplankton awaits develop-
diffi cult to cultivate and hence have been the subject ment of new methods that will allow measurement of
of feeding and ecophysiological studies (Jakobsen & in situ grazing activities by forms traditionally consid-
Hansen 1997 ; Jakobsen & Montagnes 1999 ; Stoecker ered to be autotrophic.
et al. 1986 ; Jeong et al. 2002 ); scuticociliates (Oligo-
hymenophorea), which are opportunistic bacterivores
Rotifers
that often grow up in seawater enrichments; and the
haptorids (Litostomatea) A skenasia spp. and M esodin- Rotifers are a signifi cant component of microzoo-
ium spp. The last group is an assemblage of species that plankton assemblages in many systems, especially
includes both heterotrophic and mixotrophic forms, lakes, rivers, and estuaries (see, for example, Dolan &
with the well - studied M esodinium rubrum essentially Gallegos 1991, 1992 ; Holst et al. 1998 ; Heinbokel

202 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
et al. 1988 ; Neumann- L eitao, et al. 1992 ; Barria de direct engulfment), feed by direct interception of prey,
Cao et al. 2003 ; Rougier et al. 2005 ). In brackish - swim and grow more slowly and, when mixotrophic,
water systems, they can reach densities above 103 indi- occupy a wider portion of the spectrum between strict
viduals per liter and be the dominant zooplankton autotrophy and strict heterotrophy and can either use
grazer (Sellner et al. 1 993 ; Park & Marshall 2000 ), but ingested chloroplasts or contain their own permanent
they are apparently not well adapted to oceanic or open chloroplasts. Many dinofl agellates are capable of syn-
coastal environments (Heinbokel et al. 1988 ). Some thesizing toxins, including those effective against cili-
aloricate forms do not preserve well, especially in alde- ates and other microzooplankton (see Chapters 3 and
hydes, so they are often undercounted in plankton 4 ). Generalizations about metazoans feeding on dino-
surveys (Holst et al. 1998 ). fl agellates have thus been diffi cult to make because
of species - specifi c toxic interactions that cause some
dinofl agellates to be essentially immune from grazing
Copepod n auplii and o ther c rustacean l arvae
by some metazoans (see, for example, Turriff, et al.
The principal orders of pelagic copepods in the sea 1995 ; Huntley et al. 1986 ; Sykes & Huntley 1987 ;
are the Calanoida and the Cyclopoida. As adults, they Colin & Dam 2003 ). Different groups within the micro-
range from about 0.5 – 5 mm in length, and their eggs zooplankton show different allometric relationships for
are typically in the 50 – 250 μ m size range. They hatch physiological processes as well (Hansen et al. 1997 ). It
as fi rst instar nauplii that are about the same size as is thus important to keep in mind that categorization
the eggs and proceed through twelve molt stages to of plankton by size is only a rather crude tool, neces-
adulthood, passing from the micro - to the mesozoo- sary for making generalizations about carbon fl ow and
plankton size class in the process. Although there comparisons among ecosystems, but not suffi cient for
have been some studies of feeding and other meta- a true understanding of microbial food webs.
bolic processes in early - stage (i.e., microzooplank-
tonic) nauplii, a comprehensive understanding of
their trophic impact is lacking. In some cases, early Grazing impact of microzooplankton
naupliar stages may not feed at all (Mauchline 1998 ),
relying on energy reserves retained from the egg. Early efforts to determine the ecological role of micro-
Some tracer studies suggest a diet similar to that of zooplankton focused strongly on grazing, especially of
later stages, including adults (Finlay & Roff 2004 ). At phytoplankton. A variety of methods have been used
times, they can dominate the biomass of microzoo- to estimate the grazing impact of microzooplankton
plankton assemblages (McManus et al. 2007 ), but it in situ . Capriulo & Carpenter (1983) preconcentrated
is likely that their mass- s pecifi c metabolic rates are the microzooplankton size fraction using nylon sieves
quite a bit lower than those of their protist counter- and incubated the concentrate with the natural phyto-
parts, so their overall impact is likely less. Because plankton assemblage, quantifying community grazing
they are not sampled quantitatively with coarse - mesh by the subsequent decrease in chlorophyll -a . Their use
nets and are not numerous enough to be counted of sieves to concentrate the microzooplankton may
accurately in the small volumes concentrated for have led to underestimation of the importance of alori-
counts of protists, they are often excluded from micro- cate ciliates, which can pass through even very fi ne
zooplankton surveys. meshes. Later workers used radioisotopes or fl uores-
One negative consequence of lumping plankton into cent dyes to label phytoplankton assemblages and then
sized - based trophic groups is that it ignores many of quantifi ed incorporation of label in the grazers to esti-
the interesting biological differences among them. It is mate grazing impact (Lessard & Swift 1985 ; Roman &
clear that dinofl agellates and ciliates, for example, Rublee 1981 ; Rublee & Gallegos 1989 ). Tracer methods
despite their phylogenetic relationship as members have the advantage of requiring short incubation
of the Alveolata, have very different behaviors and times, hence minimizing containment artifacts, and
physiological adaptations. Ciliates swim rapidly, have have the ability to provide grazer - specifi c rates if differ-
short generation times, feed by fi ltration, and prac- ent grazers (dinofl agellates, ciliates, nauplii) are sub-
tice autotrophy only when they can use chloroplasts sequently isolated or examined separately under the
from ingested autotrophs. Dinofl agellates have more microscope or if labeled nucleic acids in predators can
complex modes of ingestion (peduncle, pallium, or be recovered after exposure to labeled prey (Frias - Lopez

Tintinnids in microzooplankton communities 203
et al. 2009 ). Tracer methods also require knowledge Calbet & Landry (2004) summarized 20 years ’
of the time scale of digestion so that rates can be esti- worth of dilution experiments by various investigators.
mated before egestion of tracer particles or isotopes They compiled the results from 788 individual meas-
occurs (McManus & Okubo 1991 ). This can require urements covering most areas of the World Ocean.
laborious time series sampling. Overall, microzooplankton grazing accounted for the
A few studies have attempted to apply the gut fl uo- fate of about two - thirds of phytoplankton production,
rescence method to estimate microzooplankton graz- with modest variation in relation to onshore/offshore
ing. In this method, ingestion is estimated from the or latitudinal gradients (Table 9.2 ). Given the pre-
product of measured ingested chlorophyll inside the sumed strong differences in the structure of the plank-
grazers and an estimate of the gut (or vacuole) turno- tonic food web in different habitats, it is remarkable
ver rate (Tsuda, et al. 1989 ). For microzooplankton, that the microzooplankton size fraction is so consistent
this method is especially diffi cult because of the overlap in its role as the primary herbivorous pathway in the
in sizes of microzooplankton and their food organisms sea. One suggested explanation for this is that micro-
and problems associated with trying to separate these zooplankton have growth rates similar to those of their
fractions mechanically in order to measure the chloro- phytoplankton prey and hence are closely coupled in
phyll in each. In addition, it cannot easily be used to time with changes in their abundance.
measure ingestion of non - pigmented food items such Although the dilution method can be cumbersome
as bacteria or heterotrophic fl agellates. More recently, to use, and does not allow for particularly good spatial
Johnson et al. (2003) measured disappearance of or temporal resolution of grazing rates, it is clear now
fl uorescently labeled prey to study microzooplank- from the aggregate number of studies that the earlier
ton grazing on individual phytoplankton species. This allometric arguments about the importance of micro-
method is especially useful where monospecifi c blooms zooplankton were correct. However, one unfortunate
are occurring or the phytoplankton assemblage is drawback of the method is that although impact of the
dominated by only a few species. microzooplankton assemblage can be assessed for
By far the most commonly applied technique for esti- different phytoplankton groups (for example through
mating microzooplankton grazing i n situ is the dilu- the use of taxon - specifi c pigments, fl ow cytometric
tion method originally developed by Landry & Hassett signatures or microscopy; Burkill et al. 1987 ; Strom &
(1982) . Net growth of phytoplankton (as chlorophyll - Welschmeyer 1991 ; McManus & Ederington - Cantrell
a , or in some cases cell counts via fl ow cytometer;
Landry, et al. 1995 ) is compared in a series of samples Table 9.2 Summary data on the percentage of
that differ only in the degree to which they have been phytoplankton production grazed by microzooplankton in
diluted by fi ltered seawater. If grazing rates are food - various habitats ( ± standard error). The full data set consists
concentration dependent, then net phytoplankton of 788 individual measurements of intrinsic phytoplankton
growth and grazing mortality. The reduced dataset contains
growth in more dilute treatments will be greater
only those experiments that accounted for possible nutrient
because of lower mortality due to dilution of grazers.
depletion artifacts in the incubation bottles (392
This method has the advantage of requiring only
measurements). Table from Calbet, A. & Landry, M.R.
minimal manipulation of microzooplanton, many of
(2004) Phytoplankton growth, microzooplankton grazing,
which are delicate. On the other hand, a relatively long and carbon cycling in marine systems. Limnology and
incubation period of about 24 hours is usually needed Oceanography, 49, 51 – 57. Copyright the Association for the
to measure signifi cant changes in phytoplankton Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography, Inc.
abundance and because of the diel cycle in phyto-
Habitat Full data Reduced data
plankton growth. Some variations of the basic design
have been proposed to expand the method and to deal Oceanic 69.6±1.5 78.0±1.8
with situations where grazing rates are food - saturated Coastal 59.9±3.3 56.6±2.9
(Redden, et al. 2002) . There have also been several Estuarine 59.7±2.7 38.6±2.5
studies describing limitations of this method and sug- Tropical/ 74.5±2.0 71.3±2.3
subtropical
gestions for improvement; these are beyond the scope
Temperate/ 60.8±1.8 68.6±2.3
of this chapter (Dolan & McKeon 2004 ; Landry &
subpolar
Calbet 2004 ; Dolan et al. 2000 ; Gallegos 1989 ; Landry,
Polar 59.2±3.3 65.2±3.7
et al. 1995 ).

204 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
1992 ; Landry, et al. 1995 ) it is not possible to partition Saiz (2005) suggests that ciliates alone account for
grazing impact among different groups of microzoo- some 30%, on average, of the daily ration of copepods.
plankton. We thus have much less information about They are thus universally acknowledged as constitut-
the relative importance of tintinnids, other ciliates, ing a critical link in planktonic food webs. Some of the
dinofl agellates, rotifers, and crustacean larvae in the separate lines of evidence that support this include
fate of planktonic production than we do about the following: (1) direct experimental measurements
the aggregate impact of the whole microzooplankton of mesozooplankton (see, for example, Bouley & Kim-
assemblage. merer 2006 ; Fileman, et al. 2010 ; Fessenden & Cowles
1994 ), larval fi sh (see, for example, Stoecker & Govoni
1984 ), or jelly plankton (Olesen, et al. 1996 ) feeding
Nutrient regeneration by microzooplankton on microzooplankton; (2) models of trophic fl ows that
require an important microzooplankton pathway in
As the primary herbivores in the sea, microzooplank- order to be balanced (Pace, et al. 1984 ); and (3) experi-
ton are likely the primary regenerators of inorganic mental manipulations of natural assemblages to quan-
nutrients as well. At an average gross growth effi ciency tify trophic pathways (Calbet & Landry 1999 ).
of about 30% (Fenchel 1987 ; Straile 1 997 ), unicellu- One commonly used method to evaluate trophic
lar microzooplankton such as ciliates and dinofl agel- links through microzooplankton is to manipulate
lates can return about 70% of ingested food to the abundances of copepods or other mesozooplankton
dissolved or microparticulate pool for subsequent so that a gradient of predation pressure is created.
use by phytoplankton or bacterioplankton. Johannes This approach was pioneered by Lehman & Sandgren
(1965) recognized this idea, in part from allometric (1985) to study mesozooplankton grazing of phyto-
considerations, and it was also supported empirically plankton, but it has been applied subsequently to study
using stable isotope tracers of nitrogen (Caperon et al. indirect effects of mesozooplankton on phytoplankton
1979 ; Glibert 1982 ), though it seems that more than via their grazing on microzooplankton. Using this
half of the total grazer regeneration comes from small method, Sipura et al. (2003) found strong direct
fl agellates and other protists smaller than 10 μ m effects of copepods grazing on microzooplankton,
( “ nanozooplankton ” ; Probyn 1987 ), rather than from including tintinnids, in 24 l estuarine mesocosms.
larger microzooplankton, sensu stricto , such as tintin- Many such “ cascade ” experiments show evidence of
nids. The diffi culty of making these measurements and multiple trophic transfers within the microzooplank-
the paucity of observations suggests caution in advanc- ton (Sarnelle 1997 ). Stibor et al. (2004) and Sundt -
ing any defi nitive conclusions about nutrient regenera- Hansen et al. (2006) suggested that microzooplankton
tion by tintinnids or other large microzooplankton, but play a signifi cant role in transferring the effects of
the evidence of their importance based on feeding and higher trophic level grazing down through the food
respiration rates alone is strong (Dolan 1997 ; Calbet chain, especially when small algae, inedible to meso-
& Landry 2004 ). A recent review by Calbet (2008) zooplankton, are dominant in the phytoplankton
emphasizes the need for new methods and many more assemblage. Froneman (2002) observed strong cas-
observations in this area. cading effects of mesozooplankton on cells smaller
than 2 μ m (picophytoplankton) that were mediated by
microzooplankton.
Microzooplankton as food for The trophic connection between microzooplankton
higher trophic levels and mesozooplantkon can be quite important, but also
variable. For example, Liu et al. (2005) showed that
In tandem with observations that uncovered the im- microzooplankton constituted 30% of the diet of the
portance of microzooplankton as grazers and mineral- copepod Neocalanus cristatus during phytoplankton
izers of inorganic nutrients, there have been many blooms, but 70% in non - bloom conditions. Gifford &
studies and reviews documenting their importance as Dagg (1988) showed similar variability by season in a
food for larger organisms (Tiselius 1989 ; Sanders and coastal environment. The sparse data in this area has
Wickham 1993 ; Stoecker & Capuzzo 1990 ; Gifford & been reviewed recently (Calbet 2008 ), but much more
Dagg 1991 ; Gifford & Dagg 1988 ; Figueiredo et al. work needs to be done, in particular to document the
2005 ; Nakagawa et al. 2004 ). A review by Calbet & differential impacts of grazers on ciliates, dinofl agel-

Tintinnids in microzooplankton communities 205
lates, and other microzooplankters, and to evaluate ments. The modal percentage of ciliates composed of
intraguild predation (microzooplankton eating other tintinnids is 0– 5% across all environments, but there
microzooplankton). Regarding the latter, there are are some differences evident among them. For example,
many observations of dinofl agellates feeding on ciliates tintinnids are rarely more than half of all ciliates in the
and vice versa. These kinds of interactions may even shelf and oceanic samples (13 out of 371 samples),
be species- specifi c (Jacobson & Anderson 1996 ; Sjo- whereas they were often that abundant near the coast
qvist & Lindholm 2 011 ), suggesting that the pathways (90 out of 267 samples). It should be kept in mind that
of energy fl ow through microzooplankton maybe quite as a rare taxon, tintinnids may be undercounted in
tortuous. shelf and oceanic samples for which small volumes
are examined, leading to an increase in the number
of zeroes (tintinnid abundances below the detection
9.2 QUANTITATIVE IMPORTANCE OF limit). For example, Santoferrara & Alder (2009a)
TINTINNIDS IN MICROZOOPLANKTON compared 30 small volume (0.5 l) and large volume
ASSEMBLAGES (200 l of water concentrated over a 20 μ m mesh)
samples from the same stations. They found that when
Abundance and biomass the tintinnidHelicostomella subulata was present in the
large volume samples it was not detected in two - thirds
Although estimates of the abundance and biomass of of the corresponding small volume samples, although
tintinnids are numerous in the literature, making com- its abundance was signifi cantly underestimated in the
parisons among different studies is diffi cult because mesh concentrates. For this reason, when presence/
methods are not uniform. Some studies, for example, absence is being evaluated, as in biogeographic studies
include empty loricae in tintinnid counts, although of tintinnids, most investigators still use nets to collect
most do not. In converting lorica volumes measured them (Dolan et al. 2007 ).
under the microscope to cell volumes, different conver- Overall, the frequency distribution is fl atter in the
sion factors may be used for the fraction of the lorica nearshore data, with tintinnids being 95 – 100% of the
that is occupied by the cell. Also, in evaluating the rela- total ciliates in fully 9% of those samples. This is likely
tive importance of tintinnids compared with other due to the episodic nature of phytoplankton blooms
microzooplankton groups, some studies include only a in nearshore waters and to patchiness of resources,
portion of the 20 - 200 μ m heterotrophs in the total. which cause overall ciliate abundance to be highly
Most, for example, still do not include mixotrophic variable in space and time (Rassoulzadegan 1977 ).
dinofl agellates, and many either overlook or under- For all data taken together, the abundance of tinin-
sample copepod nauplii. Some include Mesodinium nids is correlated signifi cantly with that of other cili-
rubrum among “ total ciliate microzooplankton ” even ates, but the correlation is not particularly strong (Fig.
though it is effectively a fulltime autotroph. The con- 9.2 ). In fact, there are many examples in the data
spicuousness of tintinnids due to their loricae may where tintinnid abundance was zero, even when other
have led in some cases to overestimates of their relative ciliates were abundant, and vice versa. The median
abundance, but on the other hand na ï ve observers tintinnid abundance observed in estuaries and coastal
may confuse loricae with detritus, especially for highly environments in the studies we reviewed was 500 indi-
agglomerated forms. Finally, there are many more viduals per liter; for the shelf and oceanic environ-
studies that report abundances of tintinnids or the per- ments it was 21 individuals per liter.
centage of total ciliate abundance that is composed of There are many fewer studies where the biomass of
tintinnids, but relatively few studies report on tintinnid tintinnids has been quantifi ed relative to that of other
biomass separately from that of other ciliates or micro- microzooplankton groups. Most often, when biomass
zooplankton as a whole. is estimated, tintinnids are lumped with other ciliates.
Table 9.3 and Fig. 9.1 provide a summary of 39 When tintinnid abundance is estimated separately,
studies that report on the abundance of tintinnids in it is usually in studies where only ciliate biomass has
proportion to the whole ciliate assemblage. Of the 638 been measured and other microzooplankton were
total data points, 42% were from coastal environ- not counted. We did fi nd 15 studies where tintinnid
ments, including estuaries, 32% were from open shelf biomass was separately estimated and where total
environments, and 26% were from oceanic environ- microzooplankton biomass was reported. A summary

206 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 9.3 Summary of 39 studies that report the percentage of the total ciliate assemblage comprised by tintinnids. Values
are grouped in bins of 5 percentage points, except that the fi rst bin is just the data for studies that reported a value of zero for
tintinnid abundance. The original data can be found in Andersen & Sorensen 1986 , Barr í a De Cao et al. 2003 , Bojanić 2001 ,
Dennett et al. 1999 , Dolan et al. 2002 , Fileman & Leakey 2005 , Fileman et al. 2002 , Froneman & Mcquaid 1997 , Froneman
& Perissinotto 1996a , Froneman & Perissinotto 1996b , G ó mez & Gorsky 2003 , Graham & Strom 2010 , Hall et al. 2008 ,
Huang et al. 2011 , Ichinomiya et al. 2009 , Johansson et al. 2004 , Johnson et al. 2003 , Jyothibabu et al. 2006 , Klaas 1997 ,
Leakey et al. 1 996 , Lugomela et al. 2001 , Martin & Montagnes 1993 , McManus et al. 2007 , Modigh 2001 , Nakamura &
Hirata 2006 , Olson & Strom 2002 , Pitta & Giannakourou 2000 , Quinlan et al. 2009 , Sakka Hlaili et al. 2007 , Santoferrara &
Alder 2009 , Santoferrara & Alder 2012 , Santoferrara et al. 2011 , Seuthe et al. 2011 , Stoecker et al. 1989 , Stoecker et al.
1996 , Tamigneaux et al. 1997 , Vargas & Mart í nez 2009 , Yang et al. 2008 , Zhang & Wang 2000 .
All Coast Shelf Ocean
References 39 21 7 11
Total data 638 267 205 166
T (%) Frequency Frequency Frequency Frequency
0 64 39 14 11
1–5 211 32 123 56
6–10 78 19 21 38
11–15 42 14 9 19
16–20 40 15 10 15
21–25 28 14 5 9
26–30 28 11 8 9
31–35 24 17 5 2
36–40 10 7 3 0
41–45 10 9 1 0
46–50 24 20 2 2
51–55 8 8 0 0
56–60 11 9 1 1
61–65 7 5 1 1
66–70 9 8 1 0
71–75 5 3 1 1
76–80 3 3 0 0
81–85 1 0 0 1
86–90 7 6 0 1
91–95 5 5 0 0
96–100 23 23 0 0
638 267 205 166
is shown in Fig. 9.3 . In all cases, at least one other There is clearly a great deal of variability within
group of microzooplankton besides ciliates was meas- studies, especially when tintinnid biomass becomes
ured, usually either heterotrophic dinofl agellates or more than a few percent of the total. Values for the
copepod nauplii, or both. Because of the diffi culty in tintinnid portion of total microzooplankton biomass
distinguishing heterotrophic from mixo - or autotrophic as low as zero and as high as 81% were reported. In
dinofl agellates, some studies report only total dinofl ag- general, oceanic regions had a lower contribution by
ellates. Where that was the case, we did not include tintinnids to the total microzooplankton biomass. This
dinofl agellates in the biomass estimates. The 15 studies is in line with early data indicating that the tintinnid
ranged across many habitats and latitudes, from the portion of microzooplankton is higher near the coast
tropics to the arctic, and comprised oceanic to estua- (Beers et al. 1980 ) and the general perception that
rine systems. tintinnids are mainly estuarine and coastal organisms.

Tintinnids in microzooplankton communities 207
100000
10000
1000
)1−I
dni(
100
sdinnitniT
10
1
0.1
0.1 1 10 100 1000 10000 1000001000000
Aloricate ciliates (ind I−1)
Fig. 9.2 Relationship between tintinnid abundance
(individuals per liter) and that of all other ciliates in the
same sample. Least - squares linear regression:
tintinnids = 0.17 × aloricate ciliates + 688 ( R2 = 0.16). For
the plot (not the regression), 0.1 was added to all zero
values to avoid log (0), so all values of zero abundance
appear on the graph as 0.1.
however, because most studies ignored at least one
major group of microzooplankton, and the estimate of
dinofl agellate contributions is probably too small in
most studies, even when they are included, because
many putative wholly autotrophic forms likely engage
Fig. 9.1 Frequency distributions for the percentage of total in phagotrophy as well (Stoecker 1999 ). Thus, some-
ciliate abundance composed of tintinnids. Results were thing on the order of 20% or less of the total micro-
compiled from 39 studies (638 total data points) in which zooplankton biomass is in the form of tintinnids, and
separate estimates of tintinnid abundance were made. Data their overall trophic impact is likely commensurate
have been aggregated into bins fi ve percentage points wide,
with this.
and the values for zero (no tintinnids) are in a separate bin
One underappreciated aspect of tintinnid biomass
(as in Table 9.3 ).
distributions is the potential for very small species to
have a signifi cant ecological impact. Aloricate oligo-
trich ciliates as small as 7 μm have been observed to be
abundant in coastal and estuarine waters, and their
Some oceanic and open coastal environments occa- role as bacterivores and grazers of picophytoplankton
sionally showed high tintinnid biomass, however, has been suggested (Sherr et al. 1986 ; Burkill 1982 ;
especially at mid to high latitudes (see, for example, Beers, et al. 1980 ). Tintinnids, on the other hand, have
Fileman & Leakey 2 005) . Despite occasional high tin- generally been considered to be among the larger
tinnid contributions to microzooplankton biomass, microzooplankton, and many earlier studies of their
however, none of the studies had average contribu- abundance used fi ne- m esh nets to sample them quan-
tions as high as one- q uarter of the total. The real titatively, eliminating the possibility of observing small
contribution of tintinnids may be smaller than that, forms. There are numerous small tintinnids, however.

208 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
microzooplankton abundance and biomass in Long
100
90 Island Sound (unpublished observations), we have )%(
80 found that tintinnids with lorica equivalent spherical ssamoib
70 diameter less than 20 μ m can be up to 100% of total
60 tintinnids by number. Over the whole dataset ( n = 374
50 samples), these “ nano - tintinnids ” averaged only 4% of latot
40 total tintinnid biovolume, but considering that their
30 fo
growth and mass - specifi c metabolic rates should be
20 noitrop
higher than those of larger forms, their ecological
10
impact may be signifi cant. They probably graze on the
0
fj cor od a s eA t r stc Nt uic aW r c1 yP oa aNc s tW 2 NAtl E S 3 oP a O Nc c E4 e cAa otln a ca st5 on t ai S sc t W a6 l oAt aNl st7 S Be oS ea cr iW e8 n aA g nt il cS 9 e Ea q S 1 oP0 a Oc f c j o1 e o c1 ra edn a A n1 ir2 ccc t oi I ac n sd t8 O N 1 P3 ac 14 s b l b pom a e lo c da p nt ol .e kl nre M tis oeat o trp a ioe ch n ey s fd l ott u u oo h c ddp e i i dl n wea ascn et e eok ft sc to .ho t n hn e iesa rt s n i ret od u s l t m ep e o i a ns a ls l cei lb i osnl t ay k st i to ni ann t l i ah nth ne net die d m er so s i n tt c ur ero aeop rdb ih ni tai o ec l dinnitniT
c
a n b
System
Grazing
Fig. 9.3 Tintinnids as a percentage of the total
microzooplankton biomass. Data were compiled from 15
The great majority of observations on microzooplank-
studies in which tintinnid biomass was estimated separately
ton grazing impact do not separately measure rates of
from that of all other ciliates and at least one of the two
other major microzooplankton groups (dinofl agellates and different taxonomic groups or they do not separately
copepod nauplii) was included. Means are ordered from estimate tintinnid impact from that of other ciliates.
greatest to least tintinnid biomass, and error bars are the However, there are some studies where this has been
ranges within each study. Data are from 1 Seuthe et al. 2011 ; done. Table 9.4 summarizes twenty such studies. We
2 Yang et al. 2008 ; 3 Johnson et al. 2003 ; 4 Beers et al. 1980; included only those studies where tintinnids from
5 Safi et al. 2007; 6 Fileman & Leakey 2005 ; 7 McManus et al. natural assemblages were used. Each study used one of
2007 ; 8 Levinsen et al. 2002; 9 Santoferrara et al. 2011 ;
three methods to evaluate tintinnid impact: (1) incuba-
1 0 Olsen et al. 2002; 1 1 Stoecker et al. 1996 ; 1 2 Burkill et al.
tions of natural assemblages in which tintinnids
1987 ; 1 3 Dennett et al. 1 999 ; 1 4 Strom et al. 2007.
dominated the microzooplankton assemblage or were
isolated from the assemblage by micropipette; (2)
tracer studies in which uptake of surrogates (starch
Tintinnopsis nana, for example, has a lorica that is cylin- grains, yeast cells) or labeled foods (fl uorescent stains
drical and roughly 15 μ m × 20 μ m in size (Lohmann or radioisotopes) was quantifi ed; or (3) food vacuole
1908 ). This gives it an equivalent spherical diameter contents and turnover rates were measured.
of just under 20 μ m. If we consider that the cell occu- Tintinnid clearance rates in these studies ranged
pies only about half the lorica volume, its equivalent from less than 1 to about 200 μ l per tintinnid per hour,
spherical diameter would be less than 15 μ m. T intin- and ingestion from less than 1 to 15 phytoplankton
nopsis minuta is only slightly larger (Gold & Morales cells per tintinnid per hour. The overall impact on phy-
1975 ). In the annual study of Capriulo & Carpenter toplankton of consumption by tintinnids was corre-
(1983) , these two species together comprised 29 – 99% spondingly variable. Just the tintinnid component of
of all tintinnids in Long Island Sound in summer and microzooplankton assemblages could at times graze
fall. T. minuta was also the most abundant species in up to 70% of primary productivity (see, for example,
Narragansett Bay, ranging as high as 7 × 10 4 individu- Verity 1986 ; Pitta et al. 2001 ; Karayanni et al. 2005 ).
als per liter (Verity 1986 ), and it was the fastest growing In many studies, however, tintinnid grazing was
tintinnid, with rates of 0.2 – 2.3 per day (converted minimal. This variability is likely due to the temporal
from the reported doublings per day for consistency variabilty of tintinnid populations and to species -
within this chapter). Other small Tintinnopsis species, specifi c interactions. For example, Kamiyama & Mat-
such as T. beroidea , T . parva , and T. rapa , can also be suyama (2005) and Kamiyama et al. (2001) found
highly abundant at times. In our own 9 - year study of that overall grazing mortality of the bloom - forming

Tintinnids in microzooplankton communities 209
Table 9.4 Grazing impact of tintinnids on natural particle assemblages. GR , grazing rate; IR , ingestion rate; CR , clearance
rate; PSS , phytoplankton standing stock; PP , primary production. Only studies that specifi cally measured tintinnid feeding are
included. References: 1, Capriulo & Carpenter 1980 ; 2, Capriulo 1982 ; 3, Rassoulzadegan & Etiennne 1981 ; 4, Verity 1986 ;
5, Spittler 1973; 6, Heinbokel 1978 ; 7, Cleven 1996 ; 8, Kamiyama 2000 ; 9, Kamiyama et al. 2001 ; 10, Karayanni et al.
2005 ; 11, Stoecker et al. 2000 ; 12, Watras et al. 1985 ; 13, Neuer & Cowles 1995 ; 14, Kopylov & Tumantseva 1987 ; 15, Pitta
et al. 2001.
Area (reference) Type of observation Feeding rate Grazing impact
Long Island Sound (1) Incubation, natural food CR=0.45–1.05μl cell− 1h−1 15-41% PSS d− 1
Long Island Sound (2) Incubation, natural food CR=2–65μl cell− 1h−1 —
Mediterranean coast (3) Incubation, natural food IR=4.6×104– 4 ×105μm3 5.1% PSS d− 1
cell−1d−1
Narragansett Bay (4) Incubation, natural food GR=0–2.2pg chl- a L −1d−1 62%<10μm PP
(<10μm)
Baltic Sea (5) Tracers: starch grains, CR=0.5–8.5μl cell− 1h−1 —
yeast cells
California Bight (6) Tracers: starch grains CR=10μl cell− 1h−l —
Lake Constance (7) Fluorescently labeled prey CR=1.3–6.3μl cell− 1h−l 0.6-9.7% of heterotrophic
nanofl agellate production
Hiroshima Bay (8) Fluorescently labeled prey IR=1.08±0.16 cells —
cell−1h−1
Hiroshima Bay (9) Fluorescently labeled prey IR=0.16–15 cells cell− 1h−1 Species-specifi c
Northeast Atlantic (10) Fluorescently labeled prey CR=0.5–11.7μl cell− 1h−1 up to 69% PP
Chesapeake Bay (11) Fluorescently labeled prey CR=0.2–1μl cell− 1h−1 —
Cape Cod (12) Radio-labeled prey CR=3.7–45μl cell− 1h−1 —
Oregon Upwelling (13) Radio-labeled prey CR=0–7.2μl cell− 1h−1
Peru upwelling (14) Vacuolecontents <4% PP
Mediterranean Sea (15) Vacuolecontents IR=0.61 algae cell− 1h−1 Tintinnids IR =5×aloricate
0.41Synechococcus ciliates
cell−1h−1
dinofl agellate H eterocapsa circularisquama was low Tintinnids as prey for other zooplankton
when the tintinnid E utintinnus tubulosus was abundant
but was maximal when Favella spp. tintinnids were This topic is covered more thoroughly in the chapter
abundant. At present, there is not enough information on predation (Chapter 5 ), so we will only touch on it
to evaluate whether the grazing impact of tintinnids is here in the context of overall microzooplankton mor-
proportional to their abundance or biomass, for which tality. Most studies of natural populations in the fi eld
a great deal more data are available. do not separately quantify the grazing mortality of

210 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
tintinnids, instead lumping them in with other ciliates per copepod per hour. Interestingly, electivity indices
or all microzooplankton. For example, of 19 studies usually showed selection a gainst tintinnids (four out
reviewed by Calbet & Saiz (2005) in which copepod of fi ve cases) in their experiments, even when other
grazing on microzooplankton was quantifi ed, none microzooplankton were preferentially ingested over
reported separate clearance rates on tintinnids, and phytoplankton. Bouley & Kimmerer (2006) found a
only one separately quantifi ed them at all (Bollens & similar pattern in the cyclopoid copepod Limnoithona
Penry 2003 ). Thus the amount of data on mortality in tetraspina , which readily ingested aloricate ciliates, but
natural populations of tintinnids is very small com- not tintinnids. Bollens & Penry (2003) found instances
pared with the many studies on laboratory cultures. of both positive and negative selection for tintinnids in
Qualitatively, early studies of gut contents and fecal experiments with natural populations of copepods in
pellets showed that tintinnids could be found among San Francisco Bay, CA, USA.
phytoplankton and other ingested foods in copepods Other microzooplankton can be predators of tintin-
and larval fi sh (Capriulo & Ninivaggi 1982 ; Govoni, nids as well. Smalley et al. (1999) found that tintinnids
et al. 1983 ; Turner 1984 ). This led to efforts to docu- constituted up to 10% of the food vacuole contents
ment feeding rates and selectivity, using experimental of the mixotrophic dinofl agellate Ceratium furca and
methods. Robertson (1983) , for example, found clear- that the dinofl agellate appeared to ingest tintinnids
ance rates of 95 – 289 ml per copepod per day when the without their loricae. Robertson (1983) found that
common estuarine copepod Acartia tonsa fed on the the large tintinnid Favella panamensis could clear the
tintinnids Favella panamensis or Tintinnopsis tubulosa . smallerTintinnopsis tubulosa at rates up to 130 μ l per
Stoecker & Egloff (1987) found a similar result, with ciliate per hour.
the copepod clearing up to 200 ml per copepod per day
for large tintinnids; they further established that clear-
ance was higher on tintinnids than it was on phyto- In situ growth
plankton prey. Selective ingestion of tintinnids by
copepods when alternative prey are offered has also There have been many laboratory studies of growth in
been shown (Stoecker & Sanders 1985 ). Larval fi sh tintinnid species that have been brought into culture
also preferentially ingested tintinnids when presented (reviewed in Chapter 4 ). Field studies with natural
with different microzooplankton prey (Stoecker & populations under in situ conditions of food, tempera-
Govoni 1984 ). Gifford & Dagg (1988) studied the ture, etc. are not as plentiful. Some studies have
feeding of natural populations of the copepod A cartia reported a few measurements in conjunction with
tonsa on natural microplankton assemblages. They other experiments (e.g., Dolan et al. (2000) measured
found clearance rates comparable to those from labora- growth of tintinnids during two dilution experiments).
tory studies (approximately 3 – 7 ml per copepod per Others measured growth of all ciliates, but either
hour), and found strong preferences for microzoo- found tintinnid concentrations to be too low, or failed
plankton, including tintinnids, compared with phyto- to report tintinnid growth rates separately (Carrick
plankton. Nakagawa et al. (2004) found that the et al. 1992 ; Leakey et al. 1994a ; Nielsen & Ki ø rboe
euphausiidEuphausia pacifi ca ingested tintinnids with 1994 ). We found several studies that measured tintin-
higher clearance rates than on phytoplankton and nid growth and met the following criteria: they worked
suggested that poor escape abilities of tintinnids led on natural tintinnid assemblages under natural condi-
them to be caught more easily than aloricate ciliates. tions; they eliminated or accounted for predators; and
Olson et al. (2006) performed incubation exper- they reported growth rates of individual species. Their
iments to evaluate grazing pressure on a variety results are summarized in Fig. 9.4 .
of microplankton, including especially the toxin - Stoecker et al. (1983) pioneered the study of tintin-
producing diatoms P seudonitzschia spp. They found nid growth in situ , using plexiglass “ cages ” that iso-
strong preference for feeding on microzooplankton, lated natural populations of tintinnids but allowed for
especially aloricate ciliates and heterotrophic dino- the exchange of water and dissolved nutrients during
fl agellates. Although tintinnids were not abundant in incubations for 24 h. Of 16 total measurements across
most of their experiments ( ≤ 103 l− 1 ), when they were three different tintinnid species ( Favella sp., E utintinnus
present clearance of tintinnids by large and medium - pectinis , and T intinnopsis kofoidi ), she found negative
sized copepods ranged from undetectable to 3.3 ml growth rates four times. This may have been due in

Tintinnids in microzooplankton communities 211
under unlimited food in the laboratory, indicate that
2.5
they have a large growth p otential , which may be
2.0 important in the termination of phytoplankton blooms. )1–d(
In a review of laboratory studies, Banse (1982)
1.5 etar
suggested that ciliates in general have the ability to
outgrow both diatoms and dinofl agellates, their poten- htworG
1.0
tial prey organisms. Ciliates probably rarely reach their
0.5 maximum growth rates (about one to three divisions
per day, depending on size), he argued, because they
0.0
are limited by food availability. Thus, their rapid
Verity 1986 Stoecker et Gilron and Nagano and
al 1983 Lynn 1989 Uye 2002 growth rates represent a potential to respond quickly
to increases in food concentration. Such situations
Fig. 9.4 Four studies where specifi c growth rates of occur when phytoplankton bloom, especially in coastal
individual tintinnid species were measured on natural waters, and some studies have found that tintinnids
popuations under in situ conditions. Means (bars) and appear to be most abundant during or immediately
maxima (vertical lines) are shown. Rates were converted after diatom blooms (see, for example, Gomez & Gorsky
from doublings reported in Verity ( 1986), and negative
2003 ). Thus, the high variability observed in time
growth rates observed by Stoecker et al. ( 1983) were not
series of tintinnid abundance may be a refl ection of
included in the mean for consistency with Nagano & Uye
their ability to respond rapidly to changes in abun-
( 2002), who reported only signifi cant positive growth rates.
dances of their phytoplankton food. This, in turn,
would give them some ability to control those blooms,
including those of harmful algae. So tintinnids may be
viewed as part of a “ rapid response team ” , capable of
part to parasitism by the dinofl agellate Duboscquella sp., much faster growth than other microzooplankton and
which could not be excluded from the cages. In a hence potentially capable of preventing or terminating
comparison with food - replete laboratory cultures, she microalgal blooms.
found in situ growth to be much lower. Verity (1986) ,
Gilron & Lynn (1989b) , and Nagano & Uye (2002)
reported somewhat larger data sets. Verity measured 9.3 CHARACTERISTICS THAT SET
growth rates for 22 different species, including 240 TINTINNIDS APART FROM OTHER
total measurements over two years in Narragansett MICROZOOPLANKTON
Bay, an estuary in the Northwest Atlantic. His overall
average growth rate (an average of his reported annual The l orica
averages by species, converted from his calculation
of doubling rates) was 0.71 per day, with a range of One unique tintinnid property that seems to affect its
0 – 2.3. Nagano & Uye (2002) found somewhat lower susceptibility to predation relative to other microzoo-
rates (mean 0.50 per day, for 107 measurements), and plankton groups is the possession of a lorica. The con-
Gilron & Lynn (1989b) , working at a tropical North struction, composition, and function of this structure
Atlantic site, found an average growth rate of 0.81 per are covered in greater detail in Chapter 2 . We only
day for 41 measurements. All four studies suggested mention it here in passing to contrast tintinnids with
limitation of tintinnid growth either by food quantity other microzooplankton groups, including the so -
or quality, as fi eld growth rates were often less than called “ naked ” ciliates. The lorica has been proposed to
maximum rates obtained for the same species in function as a defense against predation. Capriulo et al.
culture. In addition, Verity (1986) suggested that the (1982) suggested that its purpose was to protect the
episodic presence of high concentrations of a toxic cell from predators while also facilitating escape by
raphidophyte were associated with low growth in tin- rapid sinking. It has also been suggested to function as
tinnids, indicating a kind of species - specifi c interaction a buoyancy aid (Corliss 1979 ) or a “ sea anchor ” , facili-
that is independent of food concentration. tating fi lter feeding (Fenchel 1986 ; Jonsson et al.
The magnitude of tintinnid growth rates in nature, 2004 ). Broglio et al. ( 2001) established experimentally
and the fact that they are generally less than those that the tintinnid M etacylis sp. lacked the ability to

212 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
escape predation by the rapid “ jumping” behavior that microalgae and digesting all but the chloroplasts,
is found in the closely related Strobilidiidae and other which can be used to provide a carbon subsidy by pho-
planktonic ciliates (e.g., the haptorid Mesodinium tosynthesis (Stoecker et al. 2009 ). Tintinnids, however,
rubrum ). The lack of a jumping behavior may relate to have been assumed to be strictly heterotrophic, and
the possession of a lorica, which thus protects the tin- this has been affi rmed by the observations of many
tinnid from being eaten while at the same time limiting tintinnidologists. There have been some published
its ability to escape. Margalef (1982) suggested that observations of epibiotic phototrophs living inside tin-
the need to build a lorica diverts energy from growth tinnid loricae, but not within the cytoplasm. Foster
and speculated that tintinnids thus represented “K - et al. (2006) and Carpenter & Foster (2003) , for
adapted ” ciliates (slower growth but lower mortality) example, observed epibionts, in this case unicellular
in contrast to the “r - adapted ” aloricate forms (rapid cyanobacteria, within the loricae of oceanic tintinnids.
growth when resources are abundant). As discussed Presumably, there is some mutualistic benefi t to this
above, the laboratory data indicate that tintinnids association. Mary Silver and Robin Lothrop Pinto (per-
show rapid growth when not food - limited. As of now, sonal communication) have observed fl uorescent
there are not enough experimental data to test Mar- intracytoplasmic inclusions in wild populations of
galef ’ s idea that, in general, tintinnids grow more oceanic tintinnids (Fig. and Plate 9.5 ), but there have
slowly than aloricate forms. been no experimental studies to establish whether
these are chloroplasts, endocytic algae, or parasites.
The signifi cance of possible symbiotic associations
Obligate planktonic habitat between oceanic tintinnids and microalgae is not clear
at this time. It is an established fact from many obser-
Although they are close phylogenetic cousins to the vations that mixotrophy is widespread in non - tintinnid
oligotrichs, the choreotrichs (including the tintinnids) planktonic ciliates and absent from most tintinnids.
clearly have some distinctive ecological properties. For This suggests that tintinnids may be even more impor-
example, although they may occasionally be found tant in grazing and remineralization than their abun-
in sediment samples, tintinnids are very rare in in- dance would suggest because they do not receive any
terstitial benthic habitats and probably only occur growth subsidy by photosynthesis.
there as accidentals (Carey 1992 ). In his extensive
study, Fenchel (1969) reported that members of the
oligotrich genus Strombidium , which has many plank- 9.4 KEY POINTS
tonic representatives, were almost always found as
important herbivores in the surface layers of sublit- 1. Tintinnids are but one part of a taxonomicaly
toral sands, but he did not report signifi cant pres- diverse functional category, the microzooplankton.
ence of tintinnids in any of the benthic habitats This category of planktonic heterotrophs is responsible
he surveyed. Possibly, the possession of a lorica re- for grazing most of the algal production in both open
stricts the movement of tintinnids through inter- water and coastal systems as well as most of the nutri-
stices of fi ne sands and thus tintinnids are limited ent regeneration and comprises an important food
to the pelagic habitat only. Other groups commonly resource for higher trophic levels.
found in the microzooplankton, including dinofl ag- 2. Tintinnids are usually a relatively minor compo-
ellates, rotifers, and copepod nauplii, all have non - nent of the microzooplankton community, averaging
planktonic representatives. about 7% of total ciliate concentrations, though at
times this can be much higher. The abundance of tin-
tinnids is positively but weakly related to total ciliate
Strict heterotrophy? abundance.
3. There are few estimates of grazing impact of dis-
Since the mid - 1980s, many cases of chloroplast sym- crete components of the microzooplankton. However,
biosis ( “ kleptoplasty ” ) have been documented among tintinnids have been reported on occasion to be respon-
oligotrich ciliates, a sister clade to the choreotrichs, the sible for grazing most of the primary production.
subclass that includes tintinnids. Several oligotrichs 4. Growth rates estimated for tintinnids in natural
have been shown to be obligate mixotrophs, ingesting populations, although variable, suggest average values

Tintinnids in microzooplankton communities 213
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 9.5 Differential interference contrast (left) and fl uorescence (right) images of a large tintinnid collected 40 km north of
Hawaii in 1983 by Mary Silver of the Unversity of California at Santa Cruz. Bright red autofl uorescent bodies (white in the
right panel), indicative of chlorophyll, were seen inside the tintinnid cell, and their distribution within the cytoplasm indicates
that they are not food vacuole contents. The shape of the lorica suggests that this is a member of the genus F avella or
Metacylis . For scale, the fi lament to the right of the tintinnid is a trichome of the cyanobacterium Trichodesmium sp., about
10 μ m in width. Image courtesy of Dr Mary Silver. For color version, see Plate 9.5 .
of generation times of 1 – 2 days in different coastal chloroplast symbioses, and we thank fellow chapter
systems. authors for helpful comments. Students, post - docs,
and research assistants too numerous to list contrib-
uted to the Long Island Sound microzooplankton
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS counts. G.B.M. acknowledges the late Dr Gerry Capri-
ulo for transmission of a small portion of his boundless
We thank Mary Silver and Robin Lothrop Pinto for the enthusiasm for tintinnids to a curious new graduate
images and information about tintinnids with possible student.

Chapter 10
Diversity and
Distributions of
Tintinnids
John R. Dolan1 and Richard W. Pierce2
1 Laboratoire d ’ Oc é anographie de Villefranche - sur - Mer, CNRS Universit é Paris VI,
Villefranche - sur - Mer, France
2 P.O. Box 132, North Attleboro, MA, USA
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
214

Diversity and distributions of tintinnids 215
10.1 INTRODUCTION
The diversity and distributions of planktonic organ-
isms are a subject that has intrigued oceanographers
for well over a century. Early observations emphasized
the differences in species assemblages that character-
ize different areas, perhaps corresponding to different
water masses. For example, by the early 1900s the dis-
tinct character of the polar compared with temperate
assemblages in both hemispheres was recognized as
well as the similarity of the polar assemblages. These
fi ndings led to the suggestion that perhaps undercur-
rents joined the polar seas (e.g. Cleve 1900 ). Seasonal
changes in the species found in coastal systems were
also well known. Seasonality, fi rst attributed to changes Fig. 10.1 The 1800 locations of tintinnid species records
in changes in currents and water masses, was shown used to map distributions.
to likely result from shifts in local conditions of light,
temperature, and nutrients (e.g. Brandt 1905 ). Today, Turner (1993), increased to include 302 references,
the distributional patterns of planktonic organisms 1800 sampling locations, and references up to the year
remain an area of very active research because, even 2011. This has yielded a fairly extensive geographic
though some patterns can be documented from space, coverage (Fig. 10.1 ).
such as those of phytoplankton, identifying the factors The distributions are based on literature reports of
controlling their dynamics remains elusive (see, for species occurrences. Data recorded were species names
example, Kudela 2010 ). along with latitude and longitude of sample collection
This chapter explores the biogeography and patterns as reported, or determined from sample site names, or
of species diversity of tintinnids. The basic geo- maps in the report. The references are indicated in the
graphic assemblages and patterns are defi ned. Sea- reference list with an asterisk. The database was used
sonal changes of tintinnid assemblages of coastal to plot occurrences on world maps for each genus that
systems are documented and the relationships between met a minimum occurrence criterion of containing a
abundance and distribution both temporal and spatial species reported in at least four publications by two
are examined. When possible, the patterns of tintin- different authors. Here, the term “ species ” in relation
nids are compared with those of other groups of plank- to distributional patterns refers to morpho - species.
tonic organisms. The relationship between morpho - species and the
generally accepted biological defi nition of “ species ” in
ciliates is very far from clear as morphology, mating
10.2 BIOGEOGRAPHY types, and genetics can be discordant (Hall & Katz
2011 ). However, although data are very limited at
Global biogeography present, it does suggest that at least in terms of genetics,
morpho - species of tintinnids, rather than grouping
The fi rst attempt to quantify large - scale ciliate distribu- cryptic species, may more often be different phenotypes
tions was by Entz (1884), who tabulated presence/ of the same genetic species. First, it appears that geo-
absence of each species of the known catalogue of graphically distant populations of planktonic ciliates
marine planktonic species, calculating a percentage of can be genetically identical (Agatha et al. 2004a ; Katz
total species for each sea. Not surprisingly, he found et al. 2005 ). Thus there is a priori no reason to associate
that Northern European waters, from which most geographic separation in species of planktonic ciliates
species had been described, appeared the most species - with genetic isolation. Secondly, although genetic
rich. The distributions presented here are also based studies of tintinnid are very sparse, identical sequences
on simple species records but of a considerably larger have been found for different “ species ” of T intinnopsis (Li
database than that available to Entz. The tintinnid et al. 2009 ) P etalotricha and C yttarocylis (Bachy et al.
distributions are an updated version that of Pierce & 2012 ) as well as F avella (Kim et al. 2010 ). Recently some

216 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Table 10.1 Biogeographic distribution patters of common tintinnid genera; genera considered were those that included
species reported in at least four publications by two different authors.
Cosmopolitan Neritic Warm water Boreal Austral
Acanthostomella Favella Amplectella Parafavella Cymatocylis
Amphorellopsis Helicostomella Ascampbelliella Ptychocylis Laackmanniella
Amphorides Leprotintinnus Brandtiella
Codonella Metacylis Canthariella
Codonellopsis Stenosemella Climacocylis
Dadayiella Stylicauda Codonaria
Dictyocysta Tintinnidium Cyttarocylis
Eutintinnus Tintinnopsis Daturella
Parundella Epicancella
Protorhabdonella Epiplocylis
Salpingacantha Epiplocyloides
Salpingella Petalotricha
Steenstrupiella Poroecus
Proplectella
Rhabdonella
Rhabdonellopsis
Undella
Undellopsis
Xystonella
Xystonellopsis
ambiguities in establishing species boundaries have Tropics and into the Southern Ocean, and not restricted
been found (Santoferrara et al. 2012a ; Xu et al. 2012 ), to nearshore areas (Figs 10.2 and Fig. 10.3 ). Most, but
but no cryptic species have been discovered so far. not all, of the genera are forms that have purely hyaline
We largely follow the tintinnid genus distributions loricae. The exceptions are the genera A canthostomella ,
established by Pierce & Turner (1993) : cosmopolitan, Dictyocysta , Codonella , and Codonellopsis , all of which
neritic, warm – temperate, boreal, and austral. These include “ agglutinating species ” . However, the particles
distributional patterns, or categories, have long been used by species of these genera are mainly remains of
known to characterize many if not most groups of diatoms and coccolithophorids, which are also quite
planktonic organisms (see, for example, Backus 1986 ), widespread in the world ocean.
including well - studied protist groups such as fo-
raminifera (see, for example, B é & Tolderlund 1971 ).
Neritic
As Taylor (1987) stated for marine dinofl agellates,
“ The essence . . . is a modifi ed latitudinal cosmopoli- We defi ne neritic genera as those containing species
tanism: the occurrence of the same (morpho - ) species that are very largely restricted to nearshore waters
around the world within broad latitudinal limits, the (Fig. 10.4 ). These are the most familiar forms as fi eld-
boundaries of which approximate to particular upper - work has usually focused on nearshore environments
layer temperatures. ” Within the broad latitudinal and most laboratory studies have used species from
bands, neritic or coastal forms can be distinguished coastal waters. Neritic genera are a morphologically
from oceanic species among dinofl agellates (Taylor heterogeneous set including both genera formed of
1987 ) and the same large - scale patterns characterize species with agglutinated loricae ( Tintinnopsis , Tintin-
diatoms as well (Guillard & Kilham 1 977 ). tinnidium , S tenosemella , Leprotintinnus , Stylicaudata ) as
well as genera with hyaline loricae ( Metacylis , Helicos-
tomella , Favella ). The size range of species is also very
Cosmopolitan
large including some of the largest tintinnids known
We designate as “ cosmopolitan ” those genera contain- (Favella spp.) and the smallest ( Tintinnopsis spp.). The
ing species recorded from the Arctic, through the genera all occupy a nearly pole - to- pole latitudinal

Fig. 10.2 The cosmopolitan distributions of the genera A canthostomella , Amphorellopsis , Amphorides , Codonella , Codonellopsis ,
Dadayiella , Dictyocysta , and E utintinnus . Species of these genera have been reported from neritic and oceanic areas from Arctic
to Antarctic waters.

218 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 10.3 The cosmopolitan distributions of the genera P arundella , Protorhabdonella , Salpingacantha , Salpingella , and
Steenstrupiella . Species of these genera have been reported from neritic and oceanic areas from Arctic to Antarctic waters.

Fig. 10.4 Neritic distributions characterize species of the genera F avella , Helicostomella , Leprotintinnus , Metacylis ,
Stenosemella , Tintinnidium , Tintinnopsis , and Stylicaudata . Although some records are from open waters, most species records
are from coastal waters.

220 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
distribution; thus the limit is to coastal waters, rather oral diameters. C ymatocylis species average about
than a temperature zone. 100 μ m whereas L aackmanniella species have consider-
The restriction of the genera Tintinnopsis , Stenose- ably smaller oral diameters of 30 – 35 μ m, indicating
mella , and Tintinnidium to nearshore areas probably that likely different - sized prey are exploited by Cymato-
refl ects a requirement for small mineral particles used cylis and Laackmanniella spp.
to form loricae in all three genera. Waters with suffi -
cient concentrations of small mineral particles are
Distributions of c ommonly r eported s pecies
likely limited to areas that are relatively shallow and
turbulent. The restriction of the forms with hyaline Although the cosmopolitan genera contain the most
loricae (F avella , H elicostomella , and Metacylis ) to coastal common species, none of the individual species within
waters is diffi cult to explain. Cyst formation is known the genera is cosmopolitan. For example, the most
in species of Favella , Helicostomella , and Leprotintinnus widespread species of Acanthostomella , A . norvegica ,
(Reid & John 1978 ); it may be that a cyst stage is an appears to be excluded from warm waters (Fig. 10.10 ).
important component in their life cycles, restricting The distribution of A. norvegica is reminiscent of the
distribution to shallow waters. “ bi - polar ” distribution known among a wide range of
planktonic taxa, for example radiolaria and meduso-
Warm – t emperate zoa (Stepanjants et al. 2006 ) as well in foraminifera (B é
& Tolderlund 1971 ; Darling et al. 2004 ) and dinofl ag-
Warm – temperate genera are those observed in both
ellates (Montresor et al. 2003 ). In the specifi c cases of
coastal systems and open waters throughout the world
the foraminfera N eogloboquadrina pachyderma and
ocean (Figs 10.5– 10.7 ). This group differs from cosmo-
the dinofl agellate P olarella glacialis , there is evidence
politan only in that species of these genera are absent
of genetic differentiation between the northern and
from sub - polar and polar waters. It is the largest bio-
southern populations (Darling et al. 2004 ; Montresor
geographic group in terms of the number of genera
et al. 2003 ). This may be the case for A. norvegica but
and species. Although their distributions are nearly
it has yet to be examined.
cosmopolitan, many of the genera such as Brandtiella ,
Globally, the four most widely distributed and most -
Xystonellopsis , Codonaria , and C limacocylis are charac-
often reported species are A mphorides quadrilineata ,
teristic of tropical and sub - tropical waters and are
Dadayiella ganymedes , Eutintinnus apertus , and S teen-
rarely reported from temperate waters. None of the
strupiella steenstrupii . These species have been reported
genera contains species with agglutinated loricae.
both from neritic and open waters yet appear to be
absent from far northern and southern seas (Fig.
Boreal 10.10 ). Thus, there appears to be no species that is
truly cosmopolitan. Furthermore, within cosmopoli-
The genera P arafavella and Ptychocylis (Fig. 10.8 ) have
tan genera there are species that, though frequently
long been known to be restricted to Arctic and Subar-
reported, have restricted distributions and appear to be
ctic waters. Notably, species of both Parafavella and
endemics. For example, among Codonellopsis species, C .
Ptychocylis appear to produce loricae that are variable
lagunela is found only in the North Atlantic, C. gaussi
in overall length and shape but consistent in oral diam-
only in the Southern Ocean, whereas C . ecuadata has
eter (Burkovsky 1973 ; Davis 1978, 1981 ). Both genera
been recorded only from the Indian and tropical Pacifi c
comprise species with relatively large oral diameters of
about 50 μ m, suggesting exploitation of similar - sized Oceans (Fig. 10.11 ). These species of Codonellopsis are
rather large and distinctive, so it is unlikely that they
prey.
were frequently overlooked or mistaken for other
species.
Austral
The genera Cymatocylis and Laackmanniella (Fig. 10.9 )
General c onsiderations in g lobal b iogeography
are restricted to Antarctic and Subantarctic waters. In
of t intinnids
common with boreal genera, species of both Cymato-
cylis and Laackmanniella have variable lorica character- It should be noted that there are, in principle, opposing
istics, especially length. Unlike the boreal genera, the views on the biogeography of protists in general.
two austral genera group species of distinctly different One posits no protist biogeography: “ everything is

Diversity and distributions of tintinnids 221
Fig. 10.5 Warm – temperate distributions are shown by A mplectellopsis , Ascampbelliella , Brandtiella , Canthariella , Climacocylis ,
Codonaria , Cyttarocylis , and Daturella .

Fig. 10.6 Warm – temperate distributions are shown by E picancella , Epiplocylis , Epiplocyloides , Petalotricha , Poroecus ,
Proplectella , Rhabdonella , and R habdonellopsis .

Diversity and distributions of tintinnids 223
Fig. 10.7 Warm – temperate distributions are shown by U ndella , Undellopsis , Xystonella , and X ystonellopsis .
Fig. 10.8 Boreal. Boreal distributions, restricted to the far north but reported from both neritic and open waters, are shown
by the genera Parafavella and Ptychocylis .

224 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 10.9 Austral. Austral distributions, restricted to the far south but reported from both neritic and open waters, are
shown by the genera C ymatocylis and L aackmanniella .
everywhere” because protists are effectively not example, tintinnids of diverse genera ( Favella , Epiplocy-
dispersion- limited. The combination of large global lis , Xystonella ) can produce an alternative, “ coxlielli-
population sizes, short generation times, and lack of form ” lorica, which was only recognized as an abberant
geographic barriers is thought to prevent endemism lorica form in the 1970s (Laval - Peuto 1977, 1981 ).
among protists (see, for example, Fenchel & Findlay Some lorica characteristics, typically length, can be
2004 ). Indeed many protists form cysts, including tin- quite variable. One morphometric study of the genus
tinnids (see Chapter 7) , which can be transported Cymatocylis (Williams et al. 1994 ) found that 45 lorica
actively by other organisms or passively by water or morphologies described as separate species could only
wind, giving some forms a potentially worldwide distri- be reliably sorted into fi ve distinct morphotypes. Often,
bution. The opposing view is that varying degrees of species identifi cations are made based on one or a few
endemism exist among protists and that few, if any, loricae, which may not be typical forms. Lorica - based
“ species ” of protists are truly cosmopolitan (see, for species identifi cations are not always unambiguous.
example, Foissner et al. 2009 ). This view has in recent Partly for this reason, the distributions presented here
years become established as the dominant school of are largely for genera.
thought (see, for example, Fontaneto & Brodie 2011 ). A third consideration is the possibility of relatively
In examining the biogeographic patterns of tintin- recent changes in distribution due to phenomena such
nids, there are some tintinnid “ specifi cities ” worth as climate change, ecosystem changes, construction of
recalling. Many investigations have relied on the same canals, or transport of tintinnids through ballast water
taxonomic references (i.e., Kofoid & Campbell 1929, (Pierce et al. 1 997 ). This is very diffi cult to assess as
1939 ) regardless of the area under study. This is many areas have not been well sampled and the lack
understandable as region - specifi c works are often non - of a report of a species cannot be taken as proof that
existent. However, reliance on the same references, the species was not already present. Range expansion
combined with a natural tendency to assign taxa estab- of some species may have occurred, for example into
lished names, likely increases the chance that species the Black Sea, with major ecosystem shifts (Gavrilova
found will be a subset of those illustrated in Kofoid & Dolan 2007 ).
& Campbell (1929) . Thus, the distributions of some The “ invasive species ” among tintinnids have
species may be artifi cially expanded. received no attention as tintinnids, unlike dinofl agel-
The fact that lorica morphology is the basis of tin- lates and diatoms, do not form harmful blooms nor
tinnid identifi cation, and lorica morphology can be are they likely to shift trophic food - web structure as
variable, also complicates biogeographic studies. For known from certain ctenophores. However, at least one

Diversity and distributions of tintinnids 225
Fig. 10.10 The most common species of the cosmopolitan genera show restricted distributions. A canthostomella norvegica is
absent from warm waters. The four most commonly reported and widely distributed tintinnid species (A mphorides quadrilineata ,
Dadayiella ganymedes , Eutintinnus apertus , Steenstrupiella steenstrupii ) are absent from far northern and southern seas.

226 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 10.11 Some frequently reported species show endemic distributions or highly restricted distributions. C odonellopsis
ecaudata has been reported only from the Indian and central Pacifi c Oceans. C odonellopsis gaussi is found only in the Southern
Ocean andC. lagenula in the North Atlantic Ocean.
tintinnid species may have expanded its range in recent et al. 2008) and Korean waters (Yoo et al. 1988 ; Yoo
years, perhaps through transport of ballast water. It is and Kim 1990 ).
a species most commonly known as Tintinnopsis corni- Outside of Asia, Tintinnopsis corniger was fi rst
ger , a large tintinnid with a distinctive, branching, reported in the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean Sea
hyaline aboral extension, unmistakable when seen. (Balech 1968 ; Lubel 1974 ) then in the Arabian Gulf
Such an unusual Tintinnopsis , with a large hyaline (Sharaf 1995 ). Later the species was found in coastal
branching aboral horn, was fi rst mentioned by Busch waters of the western Mediterranean Sea where it was
in 1925 and described as a form of T . karajensis from once again described as a new species, Tintinnopsis
the Strait of Makassar in Indonesia. A very similar tin- nudicauda (Paulmier 1997 ) without reference to Busch
tinnid, from Peter the Great Bay in the northern, sub - (1925) , Strelkow & Wirketis (1950) , or Hada (1964) .
polar sector of the Sea of Japan, was described as It was found in the North Sea in Dutch coastal waters
Rhizodomus tagatzi by Strelkow and Wirketis in 1950 in 2004 (Verweij et al. 2005 ). In recent years, T . corni-
without reference to Busch (1925) . The Strelkow and ger has been reported from Mission Bay, California
Wirketis description, though, was in a Russian - (Elliott & Kaufmann 2007 ). In the Mediterranean it
language publication, so that when Hada (1964) has been found in a saline lake near the Straits of
found the species in Hiroshima Bay in the Inland Sea Messina in the Central Mediterranean (Sacc à et al.
of Japan, he described it as a new species, Tintinnopsis 2008 ), in the Eastern Mediterranean in Lebanese
corniger , again with no reference to Busch 1925 . It is coastal waters (Abbou - Abi Saab 2008 ), Damietta
very unlikely that Hada would have missed the species Harbor, Egypt (Dorgham et al. 2009 ), and most
in his earlier studies of tintinnids in Japanese waters recently in the Sea of Marma (Durmus et al. 2011 ) and
(Hada 1932a, b, c, 1937 ). It is now routinely reported the Black Sea (Gavrilova 2010 ). Tintinnids have been
from Japanese waters (Nakashima & Kimoto 1987 ; found in the ballast water of cargo ships (Pierce et al.
Nomura et al. 1992 ; Kamiyama 1994a ; Kamiyama & 1997 , Chandrasekera & Fernando 2009 ), including T .
Tsujino 1996; Akizawa et al. 1998; Nakamachi & corniger (David et al. 2007 ). The far - fl ung and disjunct
Iwasaki 1998 ; Godhantaraman & Uye 2003 ; Nakane distribution (Fig. 10.12 ) is very suggestive of trans-

Diversity and distributions of tintinnids 227
Publisher's Note:
Image not available
in the electronic edition
Fig. 10.12 Tintinnopsis corniger is a large, distinctive species which apparently has been described four times and reported
from widely scattered locations suggestive of ballast-water transport or other artifi cial means of distribution. The left panel
shows illustrations from published descriptions. The right panel shows locations from which the species has been reported; the
years refer to when samples were collected: 1925 = Busch (1925) , 1926 = Strelkow and Wirketis (1950) , 1959 = Hada
(1964) , 1964 = Balech (1968) , 1984 = Paulmier, G. (1997) Tintinnides (Ciliophora, Oligotrichida, Tintinnina) de l ’ Atlantique
Bor é al, de l ’ Oc é an Indien et quelques mers adjactentes: M é diterran é e, Mer Caraibe, Mer Rouge. Inventaire et distribution.
Observations bas é e sur les loricas. Rapport IFREMER DRV/RH/97 - 17, Brest, France. © IFREMER, 1994 = Lam Hoai et al.
(1997) , 2002 Mediterranean = Sacc à et al. 2008), 2002 N. America = Elliot et al. (2007) , 2003 = Dorgham et al. (2009) ,
2004 = Verweij et al. (2005) , 2008 = Gavrilova (2010) , 2010 = Durmus et al. ( 2011 ). We use T. corniger as it is the common
name in the literature. Sacc à et al. (2012) have re - described the species as R hizodomus tagatzi .
port by ballast water (all the locations are near major example, Holt et al. 2 002; Blackburn et al. 2 006) and
shipping channels) or other human activities. many mechanisms have been proposed to account for
the pattern (Borregaard & Rahbek 2010 ). The inter-
ested reader is directed to the reviews by Blackburn
Distribution–abundance relationships et al. (2006) , Borregaard & Rahbek (2010) , and Gaston
& He (2011) for detailed considerations of the relation-
The global biogeography of tintinnid taxa clearly indi- ship. Here we will be concerned only with the decep-
cates a large heterogeneity in distributions. There are tively simple question: are widespread tintinnids found
a few very widespread taxa, whereas most appear to in higher concentrations compared with forms with
have a “ patchy ” distribution, whether they be neritic apparently restricted or patchy distributions?
or open- w ater forms. Do these differences refl ect any The interest in examining this question is twofold.
quantitative differences? A correlation of average First, it is to establish if indeed tintinnids conform to
abundance and spatial distribution is a very common the general pattern of abundant species being more
phenomenon when comparing ecologically and phylo- widespread than rare or less - abundant species. The
genetically related taxa (see, for example, Brown relationship has not been examined for organisms
1 984) . The positive relationship between abundance of the marine plankton. Among terrestrial organisms,
and distribution is a fundamental ecological pattern, exceptions to the general distribution– a bundance rule
the precise nature of which appears to be variable, have been found among taxa with great dispersal
perhaps related to the scales considered (see, for capacity, specifi cally some groups of birds (Symonds &

228 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Johnson 2006 ) and butterfl ies (Paivinen et al. 2005 ). Polar Straits of Magellan, 18 stations along a 500 km
Second, if distribution does not refl ect abundance, then cruise track (Fonda Umani et al. 2011 ). In both data
restricted or patchy distributions could be artifacts of sets, “ distribution ” , as the number of stations from
inadequate sampling effort. which a species was recorded, was positively related to
Answering the simple question of the relationship the overall average abundance of the species. Similarly,
between distribution and abundance requires detailed the distribution of a tintinnid species relative to other
data from studies on large geographic scales, which are species, its “ rank distribution ” , was correlated with
rarely reported. However, the few data available clearly the overall abundance rank of the species. Thus,
show a positive relationship between spatial distribu- spatial distribution does appear to be positively related
tion and average abundance among tintinnid species to abundance in tintinnids.
(Fig. 10.13) . The data are from different systems Another component of distribution – abundance
sampled on distinct geographic scales: the tropical relationships is temporal rather than spatial occur-
Southeast Pacifi c Ocean, 22 stations along a cruise rence. The question then becomes, “ are temporally
track of 8000 km (Dolan et al. 2007 ), and the Sub - persistent tintinnids found in higher concentrations
Fig. 10.13 The common pattern of a positive relationship between abundance and the extent of spatial distribution is
shown by tintinnid species. Data from the southeast tropical Pacifi c Ocean are from 22 stations sampled in 2004 along a
cruise track of about 8000 km between the Marquise Islands and the coast of Chile (Dolan et al. 2007 ). The Straits of
Magellan data are from 18 stations sampled in 1991 along a 500 km cruise track (Fonda Umani et al. 2011 ). For both data
sets, average abundance represents abundance averaged over all the stations sampled and species rank abundance for a pooled
data set.

Diversity and distributions of tintinnids 229
Fig. 10.14 Tintinnid species that are the most often present in a time - series are also those species that reach the highest
abundances. Data from weekly sampling of the Gulf of Naples (Italy) over 4 years (Modigh & Castalado 2002 ).
compared with forms with apparently ephemeral dis- diversity from high to low latitudes. This pattern,
tributions?” The answer requires time - series data. the latitudinal diversity gradient, is perhaps the most
Perhaps the most complete of these is for a coastal familiar and studied of all phenomena in biodiversity.
system, the Gulf of Naples, which was sampled weekly The gradient has been described as “ remarkable for its
for 4 years (Modigh & Castalado 2002 ). The most per- pervasiveness, its lack of a generally agreed explana-
ennial species was present in less than half the weekly tion, and for the plethora of explanations put forward ”
samples, indicative of seasonal changes in the species (Williamson 1997 ). One author has gone so far as to
composition of the tintinnid assemblage (Fig. 10.14 ). title a chapter in a book on diversity “ The holy grail of
Nonetheless, maximum abundance of a given species ecology: latitudinal gradients ” (Adams 2009 ). Obser-
was positively related to its frequency of occurrence. vations of the marked diversity of pelagic tropical
Overall, tintinnids that are widely distributed spa- fauna and fl ora compared with the temperate zone go
tially are also the most abundant forms. However, it back to the 19th century (see, for example, Haeckel
should be noted that global patterns are not the same 1893 ). For tintinnids, Kofoid remarked that a sample
as local patterns. The most widespread species globally from tropical waters will contain few individuals but
are not necessarily the most common within a given lots of species compared with a sample from polar
system. For example, the most widespread and abun- waters with lots of individuals of very few species
dant species in the Straits of Magellan in the 1991 (Kofoid 1930 ). Nonetheless, not long ago the existence
cruise was A canthostomella norvegica , which is restricted of latitudinal diversity gradients in the sea was ques-
to polar and sub - polar waters. Likewise, the species tioned (Clarke 1992 ). Now it is recognized that many
found most often in the Naples time - series was Tintin- marine organisms, if not most groups, do exhibit the
nopsis beroidea, a species found in coastal waters. gradient. A latitudinal diversity gradient characterizes
marine organisms ranging from fi sh and macroplank-
ton (Angel 1997 ) to benthic invertebrates (Macpher-
Latitudinal diversity gradient son 2002 ), bacteria (Fuhrman et al. 2008) , and
perhaps even viruses (Angly et al. 2006 ). The details
Common to many groups of organisms, both terres- of the marine gradients have been reviewed by
trial and marine, is the distinct increase in species Hillebrand (2004) and the relative importance of the

230 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
400
s
e Global Tintinnids
ci 300
e
p
S
of 200
er
b
m 100
u
N
0
–80 –60 –40 –20 0 20 40 60 80 100
Latitude (°N)
Fig. 10.15 Tintinnids show a typical latitudinal diversity gradient. Total species richness in bands of 5 ° of latitude from the
database of the species records in Pierce & Turner (1993) updated for this chapter.
different mechanisms responsible remains an active et al. 2006 ) and is shown in Fig. 10.15 , based on the
area of debate (see, for example, Buzas et al. 2002 ; global species records in Pierce & Turner (1993) and
Allen & Gillooly 2006 ; Corliss et al. 2009 ; Schemske et updated for this chapter.
al. 2009 ). Here the discussion will be limited to the Among other planktonic groups, the typical pattern
general pattern shown by tintinnids as it compares of tintinnids also characterizes copepod diversity (Fig.
with those known from other planktonic groups, along 10.16 ). For copepods and another group of zooplank-
with the mechanisms proposed to explain latitudinal ton, the foraminifera, the latitudinal trend in species
diversity gradients in the plankton. richness has been statistically linked to annual average
The tintinnid pattern described here is based on sea surface temperature by a positive curvilinear rela-
records of morphologically defi ned taxa, as are virtu- tionship (Rutherford et al. 1999 ; Woodd - Walker et al.
ally all the known latitudinal gradients. However, it 2002 ; Rombouts et al. 2009 ), but somewhat distinct
should be mentioned that distributions of morphologi- explanations have been proposed for the nature of the
cally defi ned taxa may not completely correspond with mechanism. For Rutherford et al. (1999) , average sea
patterns of genetically defi ned taxa. Cryptic species surface temperature is a proxy measure of the average
are known from a large range of planktonic groups: depth of the surface mixed layer, thus representing
foraminifera (de Vargas et al. 1 999 ), nanofl agellates habitat size. According to this explanation, deep
(Slapeta et al. 2006 ), diatoms (Kooistra et al. 2008 ), surface layers contain more species because they
dinofl agellates (Darling et al. 2004 ), and copepods contain more spatial niches. Alternatively, areas of dis-
(Goetz & Ohman 2010 ). As previously mentioned tinct sea surface temperature characterize areas that
among tintinnids, cryptic species, genetically distinct differ in temporal patterns and variability of primary
groups of morphologically identical organisms, are not production and thus represent areas of different
known. Plastic species, those that display very different habitat stability or seasonality (Woodd - Walker et al.
morphologies and have been described as distinct taxa, 2002 ; Rombouts et al. 2009 ). The areas of marked
are known from studies of lorica development in Favella variability in water column structure and primary pro-
(Laval - Peuto 1977 ), sequence data in P etalotricha / duction are lower in species richness, presumably
Cyttarocylis (Bachy et al. 2012 ) and are suspected from because such systems are poorer in the number of dis-
morphometric studies of Cymatocylis (Williams et al. tinct, stable, niches owing to temporal variability of the
1994 ). How diversity patterns might differ between environment. It should be noted that the explanations
morphologically defi ned and genetically defi ned species of habitat size versus stability are not mutually exclu-
is, unfortunately, unclear at present. sive. Although the commonality of patterns among
The stereotypical latitudinal diversity gradient is one tintinnids, copepods, and foraminifera suggests a single
of low species richness near the poles, increasing “ zooplankton ” gradient, the same cannot be said for
toward the equator with a peak at about 15 – 20 ° both phytoplankton.
north and south, and a slight infl ection or decrease Based on the few reports that exist, phytoplankton
around the equator. This “ textbook ” pattern has been show distinct group - specifi c and ocean - basin - specifi c
described for tintinnids (Dolan & Gallegos 2001 ; Dolan patterns. Different patterns for diatoms and coccolitho-

Diversity and distributions of tintinnids 231
Fig. 10.16 Latitudinal diversity gradients of different groups of planktonic organisms can be similar to tintinnids, such as
copepods, whereas those of diatoms and coccolithophores appear distinct. The copepod data were taken from fi gure 2a in
Rombouts et al. (2009) and averaged in bands of 5 ° of latitude. The y - axis is labeled “t axa ” as some species were grouped by
genus. The Atlantic diatom and coccolithophore data were taken from fi gure 1c in Cermano et al. (2008) . The Pacifi c
coccolithophore data were taken from fi gure 6 in Honjo & Okada (1974) , surface layer, and averaged in bands of 5 ° of
latitude.
phores have been described for the Atlantic Ocean phore diversity in the Central and Northern Pacifi c
(Cermano et al. 2008 ). Diatom diversity appears to be Ocean was also described by Honjo & Okada (1974) .
highest in high latitudes and areas of upwelling, and The same basic pattern as that described for the Atlan-
is lower in tropical latitudes, suggesting a positive rela- tic is evident with a relatively high diversity across
tionship with mixed water columns and high nutrient the Central Pacifi c Ocean although the North Pacifi c
conditions (thus opposite from that of tintinnids and appears to be species - poor relative to the North Atlan-
other zooplankton). Coccolithophore diversity, while tic Ocean (Fig. 10.16 ).
sharing the same peaks with diatoms in nutrient - rich In reality, it is somewhat unclear whether or not
zones, remains relatively high throughout the Central tintinnids are actually similar to, or differ from, other
Atlantic. The distinct patterns were explained as groups in large - scale patterns of diversity because
refl ecting diatom adaptation to high -e nergy, high - descriptions are invariably based on analysis of distinct
nutrient conditions, and coccolithophores as adapted data sets, derived from sampling on different time
to low - energy, low nutrient conditions. Coccolitho- or space scales, potentially confounding patterns.

232 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 10.17 Latitudinal diversity gradient in the Pacifi c Ocean of copepods, Ceratium species, and tintintinids are similar.
Based on data from Cruise VII of the Carnegie (Campbell 1942 ; Wilson 1942 ; Graham & Bronikovsky 1944 ). Species richness
was averaged in bands of 5 ° of latitude.
However, data from the Cruise VII of the Carnegie in A very similar latitudinal gradient of the Pacifi c
1928 – 1929 represent an exception as different groups Ocean populations of tintinnids, copepods, and C era-
of the zooplankton and phytoplankton (tintinnids, tium is evident but is relatively irregular for tintinnids
copepods, and species of the dinofl agellate genus Cera- compared with copepods and Ceratium (Fig. 10.17 ).
tium ), were catalogued from the same surface layer The patterns for Pacifi c Ocean tintinnids, copepods,
samples, allowing direct comparison of species abun- andCeratium all resemble closely that of the “ global ”
dance patterns. The complete data on the three groups pattern for zooplankton in which diversity is thought
suggest similar global latitudinal diversity gradients to be inversely related to variability in primary produc-
(Dolan 2011 ). Here the patterns of the Pacifi c Ocean tion and/or positively related to average surface layer
based on the Carnegie reports (Campbell 1942 ; depth. Thus, resource stability and/or habitat size are
Graham & Bronikovsky 1 944; Wilson 1942 ) will be associated with high diversity. Notable is the fact that
considered because data on the Pacifi c populations are Ceratium in the phytoplankton shares the pattern
often sparse (see, for example, Rutherford et al. 1999 ; as tintinnids and copepods.Ceratium may not be typi-
Rombouts et al. 2009 ) and the Carnegie data are cal of the phytoplankton. Some species of Ceratium
dominated by Pacifi c Ocean stations (126 of the 160 are known to be mixotrophic, although mixotrophy
stations). appears to be a relatively minor nutritional mode

Diversity and distributions of tintinnids 233
Fig. 10.18 Latitudinal diversity gradients of the genera T intinnopsis and Eutintinnus are distinct, refl ecting adaptation to
different types of system. Total species richness in bands of 5 ° of latitude are from the database of the species records in Pierce
& Turner (1993) updated for this chapter.
(Bockstahler & Coats 1993 ). There may be no general richness is highest in temperate systems for calanoid
pattern characteristic for different phytoplankton taxa. copepods whereas cyclopoid copepods are more species -
It appears in comparing diversity trends of Atlantic rich in sub - tropical estuaries. The differences were
Ocean diatoms and coccolithophores that individual explained as likely refl ecting calanoid copepod adapta-
groups of phytoplankters differ considerably in their tion to the large seasonal changes typical of temperate
large - scale diversity patterns. systems (Turner 1981 ).
Just as different major phytoplankton taxa show dis- Tintinnids, as a whole, show a latitudinal diversity
tinct large - scale patterns of diversity, patterns of spe- gradient similar to that of copepods and C eratium . It is
cifi c groups within a given taxon can be distinct as a reasonable to expect that the same mechanism explains
lower level taxon can be adapted to, or characteristic the pattern in all three groups and that it can be linked
of, a particular type of environment. This is easily seen directly or indirectly with sea surface temperature, as
in tintinnids by comparing two species - rich genera: shown for copepods and foraminfera (Rutherford et al.
Tintinnopsis and E utintinnus . T intinnopsis species, with 1999 ; Woodd - Walker et al. 2002 ; Rombouts et al.
their loricae agglutinated with small mineral particles, 2009 ). However, the precise nature of the mechanism
are essentially restricted to neritic shallow waters and (e.g., exactly how environmental stability promotes
usually dominate tintinnid assemblages in bays and diversity or conversely how environmental variability
estuaries, especially those in temperate climates. Eutin- inhibits diversity), remains to be identifi ed.
tinnus species, although found among neritic assem-
blages, are very commonly found in open waters from
temperate to tropical zones and are often the dominant 10.3 ASSEMBLAGES OF COASTAL
form in tropical assemblages. The two genera display SYSTEMS
very different biogeographies (Fig. 10.4 ) and show very
different latitudinal diversity gradients (Fig. 10.18 ). Seasonal changes in species richness
Tintinnopsis species richness is very low in the tropics
and peaks in the temperate zones of both the southern Very early in the 20th century, under the infl uence of
and the northern hemispheres at about 40 ° . In con- a need to understand fi sheries dynamics, studies of
trast, Eutintinnus species richness resembles the general plankton shifted focus from taxonomy to community
global tintinnid pattern, being highest in the tropics and population biology, with particular attention
and sub - tropical areas. devoted to annual plankton cycles (Mills 1989 ). Tem-
Among other zooplankton, the same phenomenon poral variability of planktonic organisms in coastal
of distinct differences in biogeographic patterns among systems was already well known; Karl Brandt (1901)
particular taxa is also known. For example, different remarked, “ To know the plankton of a body of water,
patterns characterize calanoid and cyclopoid copepods it is necessary to repeat sampling at the shortest inter-
in the estuaries of eastern North America. Species val of time possible over at least a year ” . It was soon

234 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
recognized that seasonal changes in species composi- Exceptions to the general pattern of a seasonal shift
tions were not due to shifts in the locations of waters from species with hyaline loricae to those with aggul-
masses containing different assemblages but rather tinated loricae have been reported. A nearly invariant,
the waxing and waning of different species within Tintinnopsis - dominated assemblage characterized the
the system. Some of the earliest studies on seasonal Bahia Blanca Estuary in Argentina. In waters near the
changes in planktonic populations concerned or Isle of Man in the northern Irish Sea, the tintinnid
included tintintinnids (see, for example, Laackmann assemblage is dominated year - round by species of S ten-
1908 ; Lohmann 1 908 ; Lebour 1917 ). Given the long osemella or Tintinnopsis (Graziano 1989 ). Species with
history of European studies, it is perhaps not surprising hyaline loricae, which appear in other coastal systems
that although tintinnid assemblages have been studied of the North Atlantic in the summer months, were
in a very wide range of coastal systems, Mediterranean virtually absent. Species with agglutinated loricae may
and North Atlantic systems have received the greatest be better adapted to turbulent conditions, which gener-
attention (Table 10.2 ). ally correspond with the winter season. The small
Reports from nearly every system describe very dis- mineral particles required to build their loricae may
tinct seasonal changes in the occurrences of individual not be present in suffi cient concentrations in the water
species and species richness. Perhaps the most inten- column during the summer months in most coastal
sive time - series available, the Gulf of Naples sampled systems. The year -r ound dominance of species with
weekly for 4 years, showed that none of the 10 most agglutinated loricae may then be because some systems
common species were found even half the time and are also high- energy, turbulent systems year - round.
most less than a third of the time (Fig. 10.14 ). Differ- Another characteristic common to many different
ences in the assemblages and patterns in different coastal systems is that the transitional periods between
systems have led to the suggestion that these constitute winter and summer correspond to the period when
distinct “ tintinnid community fi ngerprints ” for each species richness is highest (Fig. 10.19 ). These periods
system (Modigh & Castalado 2002 ). Although no are characterized by assemblages containing species
two systems appear identical in detail, quite similar both with hyaline and agglutinate loricae. In contrast
qualitative patterns have been reported from disparate to the commonality of such transitional periods repre-
systems. senting peak species richness, the period of minimum
An apparently common pattern is that species with species richness varies in different regions. In the tem-
hyaline loricae constitute the bulk of the community perate systems of the Atlantic, the winter months cor-
in the summer months whereas species with aggluti- respond with periods of low species richness, whereas
nated loricae dominate in winter. Thus, the summer in Mediterranean systems the summer months are the
communities of the tropical S ã o Sebastiã o Channel in most species - poor.
Brazil and a Mangrove system in southeast India are A variety of temporal patterns in species richness
dominated by species with hyaline loricae ( Eutintinnis , has been reported from tropical and sub- tropical
Dadayiella , Amphopellopsis ) and the winter assemblage systems, some related to occurrence of the rainy or dry
by species with agglutinated loricae (T intinnopsis , S ten- periods. In the mangrove system of southeast India,
osemella , Codonellopsis ). Such a pattern, fi rst reported peak abundances during dry months correspond with
for the Kiel Bight (Laackmann 1908 ), has been peak species richness and abundance (Godhantara-
reported for a surprising variety of coastal systems: the man 2002 ). In New Caledonia, species richness was
Bay of Fundy (Middlebrook et al. 1987 ), Narragansett strongly correlated with tintinnid abundance (Dolan et
Bay (Verity 1987 ), Mission Bay in Southern California al. 2006 ). These relationships suggest that species rich-
(Elliott & Kaufman 2007 ), the Gulf of Naples (Modigh ness may be related to overall tintinnid abundance.
& Castalado 2002 ), and Hiroshima Bay (Kamiyama & Comparing numbers of species found and concentra-
Tsujino 1996 ). The pattern appears to extend from the tions of tintinnids in some of the seasonal studies
Arctic waters of the White Sea, where Helicostomella (those in which the data could be easily extracted)
dominates in mid - summer (Burkovsky 1976 ), to Ant- shows a positive, albeit weak, relationship across differ-
arctic sub - polar waters, where the springtime commu- ent coastal systems (Fig. 10.20 ).
nity in the Straits of Magellan was dominated by A general positive relationship between tintinnid
Tintinnopsis spp. and the autumn assemblage by Acan- total abundance and species richness suggests condi-
thostomella (Fonda Umani et al. 2011 ). tions that allow the development of a dense population

Table 10.2 Studies of seasonal changes in tintinnid assemblages of coastal systems.
System Location Reference
Mediterranean Region
Black Sea Romanian coast Petran1958
Black Sea Crimean coast Dogopolskaya1940
Damietta Harbor Egypt Dorgham et al.2009
Jounieh Bay Lebanon Abboud-Abi Saab1989
Palm Island Lebanon Abboud-Abi Saab2002
Bozcaada Island Aegean Sea Balkis& Wasik 2005
Bay of Buyucekmece Bay Marmara Sea Balkis2004
Mali Ston Bay Eastern Adriatic Krsinic1980
Kastela Bay Eastern Adriatic Bojanic2001
Ionian Sea Mediterranean Sea Sitran et al.2007
Naples Southern Italy Modigh& Castaldo 2 002
Bay of Villefranche Southern France Balech1959; Rassoulzadegan1979;
Dolan et al.2006
San Remo Northeast Italy Rampi1948
Gulf of Marseille Southern France Balech1959, Travers& Travers 1971
Thau Lagoon Southern France Lam-Hoai et al.1997
Blanes Southeast Spain Margalef1957
Gulf of Valencia Southeast Spain Duran1951, 1953
Bay of Algers Algeria Vitello1964
North Atlantic
Bay of Fundy New Brunswick, Canada Middlebrook et al.1987
Bedford Basin Nova Scotia, Canada Paranjape1987a
Long Island Sound New York, USA Capriulo& Carpenter 1 983
New York Bight New York, USA Gold& Morales 1 975
Narrangansett Bay Rhode Island, USA Hargraves1981; Verity1987
Buzzards Bay Massachusetts, USA Pierce& Turner 1994
Damariscotta Estuary Michcigan, USA Sanders1987
Gullmar Fjord Western Sweden Hedin1974
Kiel Bight Baltic, Germany Laackmann1908
Isle of Man North Sea Graziano1989
Southampton Water UK Leakey et al.1993
Bay of Cascais Portugal Silva1950
Obidos Lagoon Portugal Silva1953
Nervion Estuary Northeast Spain Urrutxurtu2004
South Atlantic
São Sebasti ão São Paulo, Brazil Eskinazi-Sant’anna& Bjornberg 2 006
Bahia Blance Estuary Argentina Barria de Cao1992
Mauritania and Senegal West Africa Duran1965
Others
White Sea Arctic Burkovsky1976
Signy Island Antarctica Leakey et al.1994
Hiroshima Bay Japan Kamiyama& Tsujino 1 996
Akkeshi Bay Japan Taguchi1976
Tokyo Bay Japan Nomura et al.1992
Funka Bay Japan Dohi1982
Gulf of Elat Red Sea Kimor& Golandsky 1 981
Kuwait Arabian Gulf Skryabin& Al -Yamani2006
Parangipettai Southeast India Godhantaraman2002
Mission Bay California, USA Elliott& Kaufman 2007
New Caledonia South Pacifi c Dolan et al.2006

236 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 10.19 Coastal systems usually show distinct seasonal changes in the species richness of tintinnid assemblages. Data are
from sources listed in Table 10.1 .

Diversity and distributions of tintinnids 237
Fig. 10.20 Species richness of tintinnid assemblages in coastal systems is often highest when overall tintinnid
concentrations are high. Data are shown by plotting species richness by month against average tintinnid concentration for a
wide range of systems. Data sources are references for the systems given in Table 10.2 .
of any particular tintinnid species will allow the de- that temporal trends in species richness are similar for
velopment of detectable populations of other species. tintinnids and other planktonic ciliates.
Conversely, conditions that prevent any particular spe- There are also some data on seasonal trends of
cies from becoming abundant are most often poor con- species richness in tintinnids compared with other
ditions for all other species as well. The seasons, then, groups of the “ microplankton ” : diatoms, and dinofl ag-
of minimum tintinnid species richness refl ect low over- ellates. Many of the earlier reports on seasonal changes
all population size corresponding with seasonal in coastal plankton communities focused not on tin-
minima in primary production, which in temperate tinnids but microplankton with, in reality, a primary
systems is in winter and in Mediterranean systems in interest in patterns of diatoms and dinofl agellates.
summer. Fortuitously, some of these studies were conducted by
Whether the seasonal patterns in coastal systems investigators with a wide range of taxonomic expertise
shown by tintintinids are peculiar to them or are (i.e., Rampi, Margalef, and Duran), allowing compari-
shared with other planktonic groups is unclear. For son with some confi dence of temporal trends in the
other planktonic ciliates, owing to the diffi culty in pre- species richness of tintinnids compared with the other
cisely identifying ciliates other than tintinnids, there groups of the microplankton.
are very few reliable data on seasonal changes in Seasonal changes in species richness of different
species richness. A perhaps singular exception is the groups of the microplankton in three coastal sites
study of Leakey et al. (1993) on the ciliates of South- of the northwest Mediterranean (San Remo (Italy),
ampton Water, a eutrophic temperate estuary on the Blanes (Spain), and the Gulf of Valencia (Spain)) are
southern coast of the United Kingdom in which quan- shown in Fig. 10.21 . The three sites all showed the
titative protargol staining was used (Montagnes & “ Mediterranean” pattern of tintinnid species richness:
Lynn 1987 ) and taxonomic expertise provided by that is, peaks in spring and autumn with minimum
Denis Lynn. Seasonal changes in species richness of species numbers in winter. Furthermore, all three sites
ciliates (pooling all taxa) showed the typical tintinnid show parallel trends for species richness of diatoms
pattern of North Atlantic coastal systems: that is, a andCeratium . Species richness of all three groups co -
distinct summer peak and winter minimum in species varied closely in the San Remo and Gulf of Valencia
richness. Thus, it would appear reasonable to assume populations. However, diatom and Ceratium species

238 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
indicating that different mechanisms govern the diver-
sity of zooplankton and phytoplankton at least in
northwest Mediterranean systems.
Seasonal changes in morphotypes
As tintinnid species are distinguished by characteris-
tics of their loricae, changes in species composition of
an assemblage corresponds with changes in the loricae
of the assemblages. Among the morphological charac-
ters of tintinnids, lorica oral diameters have received
special attention. For a given species, the oral diameter
is a relatively invariant taxonomic characteristic (Gold
& Morales 1975, 1976 ; Laval - Peuto & Brownlee
1986 ), one that is closely related to both maximum
and optimum prey size, among other ecological char-
acteristics (see Chapter 4 and Dolan 2 010 ).
The morphological character “ lorica oral diameter ”
has been used to assess seasonal changes in commu-
nity characteristics of tintinnid assemblages. It has
been examined in different manners, somewhat com-
plicating comparisons. Community average lorica
diameter was used to describe assemblages of the Bay
of Fundy (Middlebrook et al. 1987 ), Naragansett
Bay (Verity 1987 ), and Kingston, Jamaica (Gilron
et al. 1991 ). The modal and largest diameters were
reported for the Long Island Sound assemblages
(Capriulo and Carpenter 1983 ), median size for assem-
blages of New Caledonia (Dolan et al. 2006 ) and the
Ionian Sea (Sitran et al. 2007 ), and the size – frequency
distribution of the most abundant species for Funka
Fig. 10.21 Temporal changes in the species diversity of
Bay (Dohi 1982 ). Nonetheless, all the studies docu-
tintinnids can parallel, or be distinct from, species richness
mented changes in the morphotypes constituting the
trends in other groups such as diatoms or C eratium . Monthly
tintinnid community specifi cally in terms of lorica oral
species richness of tintinnids, diatoms, and C eratium in three
diameters.
coastal systems of the northwest Mediterranean Sea. Top
panel, data of Rampi (1948) for San Remo, Italy; middle An example of a seasonal change in “ community
panel, data (monthly averages) from Margalef (1957) for average lorica oral diameter ” is shown in Fig. 10.22
Blanes, Spain; bottom panel, data from Duran (1953) for from Verity ’s study of Narragansett Bay tintinnids over
the Gulf of Valencia. 3 years (Verity 1987 ). Verity documented an annual
cycle showing a seasonal variability of about 50%,
which appears to be typical based on the results of
richness differed from the tintinnids in the Blanes other studies. In Verity ’ s study, community oral diam-
assemblages. Interestingly, Margalef noted that the eter was signifi cantly, albeit weakly, related to the
seasonal trends of the Blanes populations, with a portion of chlorophyll -a in the size fraction between
summer phytoplankton bloom, were unusual for the 10 and 150 μ m. Metrics of community oral diameter,
northwest Mediterranean (Margalef 1957 ). Nonethe- whether average, modal, or median, have not been
less, it is clear that seasonal changes in the species easily and unambiguously related to characteristics of
richness of tintinnids can be distinct from temporal the phytoplankton crop. This is likely because not only
trends in diatoms or Ceratium species richness, thus phytoplankton resources, but also competition from

Diversity and distributions of tintinnids 239
blages in open - water systems. Very few open - water
systems have been studied in different seasons and
even fewer by the same investigators, assuring a certain
comparability among samplings and sample analysis.
Detailed quantitative data are completely lacking, with
most reports giving little more than brief lists of abun-
dant forms in winter and summer. However, such
“ occurrence data ” do suggest that open - water systems
may not exhibit the large seasonal changes in species
composition that characterize coastal systems.
Fig. 10.22 Seasonal change in tintinnid assemblages is For example, the typical seasonal change from a
refl ected in the average lorica oral diameter of the winter assemblage dominated by species with aggluti-
assemblage. The graph shows average monthly values of nated loricae to a summer assemblage dominated by
Narragansett Bay tintinnids from Verity (1987) . Changes in hyaline species can be absent. In both winter and
community values of lorica oral diameter (average, mode, or summer, the assemblage of the Inland Sea of Japan
median) have been related to changes in phytoplankton appears to be dominated by T intinnopsis beroidea and
size - composition and concentration.
Stenosemella nivalis (Godhantaraman & Uye 2001 ).
Likewise, assemblages of “ large ” tintinnids of the
Southern Yellow Sea are dominated by S tenomella
other microplankton grazers as well as species - specifi c steini , Tintinnopsis karajacensis , and T . radix in winter
tintinnid mortality from metazoan grazers or para- and by C odonellopsis mobilis and T. karajacensis in the
sites, can infl uence the size of the dominant oral summer. These were both studies of temperate, open,
diameter. but relatively shallow, waters of the western Pacifi c
Tintinnid assemblages of coastal systems are usually Ocean and may be thought exceptional. However, rela-
dominated by one species, which more or less defi nes tively detailed data from a contrasting system, the sub -
the community oral diameter. Most other species tropical Gulf of Mexico, also suggest that seasonal
present will be those with oral diameters distinctly dif- changes in species composition in deep open waters, in
ferent from that of the dominant species. An example which agglutinated species are a minor component,
illustrating the distribution of lorica oral diameters in are also slight compared with coastal systems.
the spring and autumn assemblages of contrasting The microplankton of the Gulf of Mexico was
system, the Gullmar Fjord in Sweden and the Great studied by Balech (1967a, b) , who collected samples
Lagoon of New Caledonia, is shown in Fig. 10.23 . In from a series of 10 cruises in 1964 and 1965 in the
these assemblages, abundant species are either alone Northeast Gulf of Mexico. Of the 10 cruises, four were
in a size - class of lorica oral diameter or share the size - summer cruises (June– September) and four were
class with but one other species. In the New Caledonia winter cruises (December to early March). The pooled
assemblages, the three most abundant species are in summer cruise data represent species lists from 40 sta-
distinct size - classes of lorica oral diameter. It appears tions, and the winter cruise data represent 46 stations,
to be common that in a given assemblage, the most allowing a rough comparison of summer and winter
abundant species are often of distinct oral diameters tintinnid assemblages. Furthermore, the occurrences
(compared with the other species present), presumably of Ceratium species, among other dinofl agellates, were
exploiting prey of distinct sizes (see, for example, Bol- also recorded, allowing a comparison with the species -
tovskoy & Alder 1992 ; Dolan et al. 2009 ), which is rich group of phytoplankters known to share temporal
suggestive of resource partitioning among different patterns of species abundances in the northwest Medi-
tintinnid species. terranean Sea (see, for example, Rampi, 1948 ; Raybaud
et al. 2009 ).
Balech did not report quantitative data but rather
10.4 ASSEMBLAGES OF OPEN WATERS species lists for each of the stations; consequently,
occurrence or “ occupancy ” – describing how wide-
In contrast to the communities of bays and estuaries, spread or rare was each species – could be estimated
little is known of seasonal changes in tintinnid assem- simply from the percentage of stations from which a

240 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 10.23 Co - occurring abundant species usually differ in lorica oral diameter. The graphs show the distribution of
tintinnid species in size - classes of lorica oral diameter in March and October in contrasting systems: the Gullmar Fjord in
western Sweden (Hedin 1974 ) and the Great Lagoon of New Caledonia (Dolan et al. 2006 ). In the Gullmar Fjord graphs,
asterisks denote size - classes containing species described as abundant. In the New Caledonia graphs, numbers 1, 2, and 3
denote the size - classes of the fi rst, second, and third most abundant species.
species was recorded. In general, within groups of eco- were common to the summer and winter lists. Species
logically similar organisms, occurrence is closely cor- found in the winter, but not in the summer, numbered
related with abundance, meaning the more often a but 14 of the 78 found. Of the 98 summer species, only
species occurs in a set of samples, the higher its abun- 32 did not occur in the winter samples. Besides the
dance relative to other species (Brown 1 984; Gaston large overlap in the lists of summer and winter species,
& He 2011 ). Overall, the winter and summer assem- species occurrences were also very similar. The most
blages of tintinnids and C eratium were surprisingly widespread species in the summer were, by and large,
similar in species composition as well in the occurrence also widespread in winter (Table 10.3 ). The rank -
patterns of the species. occupancy patterns for the entire summer and winter
The tintinnid species catalogue for summer and assemblages (ranking each species in order of the
winter combined numbered 112. Out of the 112, 64 portion of stations from which it was recorded) were

Diversity and distributions of tintinnids 241
Table 10.3 Tintinnids of the Gulf of Mexico in winter and correlated with its occupancy rank in the winter
summer differed little in terms of the identities of the most assemblage but with a stronger correlation than that
abundant species: the 15 most widespread species in the found with the tintinnids.
summer and winter and their corresponding ranks in the Overall, the assemblages of tintinnids and Ceratium
two seasons (data extracted from Balech (1967a) ) ; the most
in the Gulf of Mexico were nearly the same in the
widespread summer species are denoted in bold.
summer and in the winter. The apparent lack of a large
Winter Top 15 species Summer seasonal change in assemblages contrasts with the
rank Summer and winter rank studies of nearshore systems, whether temperate, sub -
tropical, or tropical, all of which show marked differ-
15 Amphorides amphora 1
ences. The apparent similarity of summer and winter
10 Amphorides quadrilineata 11
species assemblages of both tintinnids and Ceratium
6 Ascampbelliella urceolata 9
31 Climacocylis scalaroides 14 could be the result of pooling data from several cruises
11 Codonaria cistelula 17 sampling different areas, and thus an effect of sam-
22 Codonellopsis orthoceras 15 pling scale. Alternatively, stability of species assem-
13 Dadayiella ganymedes 16 blages may be an attribute of large open - water systems.
2 Dictyocysta lepida 8 Seasonality remains to be investigated in other open -
4 Epiplocyloides reticulata 4 water systems.
36 Epiplocylis undella 6
27 Eutintinnus fraknoii 12
14 Eutintinnus medius 6
10.5 KEY POINTS
1 Eutintinnus tenuis 10
8 Proplectella claparedei 2
3 Protorhabdonella simplex 7 1. Global biogeography. Tintinnid geographic distribu-
7 Rhabdonella corncopia 33 tions at the generic level fall into one of fi ve patterns:
12 Rhabdonellopsis apophysata 3 cosmopolitan, neritic, warm – temperate, boreal, and
9 Steenstrupiella steenstrupi 24 austral. These distributional patterns, or categories,
5 Xystonella treforti 13 roughly correspond to a modifi ed latitudinal cosmo-
politanism with a dichotomy between coastal and
open - water forms. Although there are tintinnid genera
with cosmopolitan distributions, no single species, or
similar log -n ormal or log - series patterns of a very few more precisely “ morpho - species ” , is known to have a
widespread species, and most species were found in cosmopolitan distribution. In contrast, some species do
fewer than 20% of the stations sampled (Fig. 10.24 ). show the very restricted distributions of endemics. The
The similarity of the summer and winter assemblages records of at least one species suggest recent artifi cial
was also refl ected in the correlation between a given dispersal.
species occurrence rank in the summer list and its 2. Distribution – abundance relationships. In common
occurrence rank in the winter list (Fig. 10.23 ). with many groups of organisms, there is a positive rela-
The Ceratium species, which totaled 55 for summer tionship between abundance and distribution among
and winter combined, showed the same overall pat- tintinnid species. Within a given system or biome, the
terns as the tintinnids when comparing the summer population size of a species is positively related to its
and winter assemblages. Most of the species were spatial and temporal occurrence. Conversely, rare
present in summer and winter samples. The summer species of tintinnids are both low in abundance as well
assemblage of 49 species included only four not found as infrequently found.
in the winter samples. Of the 50 species in the winter 3. Latitudinal diversity gradient. Tintinnids show a
assemblage, only six did not occur in the summer latitudinal gradient of species richness, one that is
samples. The species occupancy patterns of the similar to that described for foraminifera and copep-
summer and winter assemblages were also similar, ods. Thus, there may be a common “ zooplankton
characterized by a very few widespread species and latitudinal diversity gradient ” ; the pattern has been
many species found in a minority of the stations linked to average sea surface temperature, thought to
sampled. Like tintinnid species, the occupancy ranks of refl ect water column characteristics. The tintinnid
a Ceratium species among the summer stations was pattern is also shared by dinofl agellates of the genus

242 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Fig. 10.24 Occupancy patterns of summer and winter assemblages of tintinnids and C eratium in the Gulf of Mexico are
both show little seasonal differences (based on data from Balech (1967a) ). Top panels, geographic ranks, from widespread to
rare, of each species in the summer and winter assemblages; bottom panels, the relationship between the geographic rank of
species found both in the summer and winter. In summer, the most widespread tintinnid species, A mphorides amphora , was
found in 70% of stations sampled; in winter, the most widespread species, E utintinnus tenuis , was found in about 60% of the
stations sampled. All the species assemblages showed a pattern of species occupancy or occurrence of most species in just a
few stations. For the species that occurred in both summer and winter, summer and winter ranks were signifi cantly related
(for tintinnids:n = 64, r = 0. 57; for C eratium : n = 44, r = 0.74).
Ceratium . However, different latitudinal gradients char- of individual species of tintinnids and species richness
acterize other phytoplankton groups, diatoms, and characterize most coastal ecosystems. A common
coccolithophorids. As there appears to be no single lati- pattern is species with hyaline loricae constitute the
tudinal diversity gradient for marine plankton, differ- bulk of the community in the summer months whereas
ent mechanisms likely act on different groups of the species with agglutinated loricae dominate during the
plankton. remainder of the year. The period of highest species
4. Seasonal changes in species richness of coastal richness generally corresponds to periods of high
systems. Distinct seasonal patterns in the occurrences overall tintinnid abundance. Within a coastal system,

Diversity and distributions of tintinnids 243
patterns of seasonal changes in the species richness of 6. Assemblages of open waters. Little is known of sea-
tintinnids can parallel those of other planktonic groups sonal changes in tintinnid assemblages in open waters.
such as aloricate ciliates, diatoms, or Ceratium , but can However, it appears that open - water systems may lack
also be distinct. the large seasonal change in assemblages known from
5. Seasonal changes in morphotypes in coastal coastal systems.
systems. In tintinnids the lorica oral diameter, which is
relatively invariant for a given species, is related to the
size of prey upon which the species feeds. In an assem- ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
blage, the most abundant species are usually of distinct
oral diameters (compared with the other species The comments and contributions of Sabine Agatha,
present), presumably exploiting prey of distinct sizes. Urania Christaki, Wayne Coats, Takashi Kamiyama,
Various metrics of a “ tintinnid community oral diam- George McManus, Dave Montagnes, Alessandro
eter ” have been used to assess seasonal changes in Sacc à , and Diane Stoecker are gratefully acknowl-
community characteristics of tintinnid assemblages in edged. Funding for this work was provided by the
terms of morphology, and seasonal changes in these French Agence National de la Recherche and Pole Mer
metrics have been loosely related to changes in the PACA through the ANR - Biodiversit é AQUAPARADOX
characteristics of the phytoplankton crop. project.

References
* Abboud - Abi Saab , M. ( 1989 ) Distribution and ecology of growth of Karlodinium micrum (Dinophyceae) . Journal of
tintinnids in the plankton of Lebanese coastal waters Plankton Research , 28 , 737 – 751 .
(eastern Mediterranean) . Journal of Plankton Research , 11 , Aelion , C.M. & Chisholm , S.W. ( 1985 ) Effect of temperature
203 – 222 . on growth and ingestion rates of F avella sp . Journal of Plank-
* Abboud - Abi Saab , M. ( 2002 ) Annual cycle of the microzoo- ton Research , 7 , 821 – 830 .
plankton communities in the waters surrounding the Palm Aescht , E. ( 2001 ) Catalogue of the generic names of ciliates
Island Nature Reserve (north Lebanon), with special atten- (Protozoa, Ciliophora) . D enisia , 1 , 1 – 350 .
tion to tintinnids . M editerranean Marine Science 3/2 , Agassiz , A. ( 1906 ) Reports on the scientifi c results of the
55 – 76 . Expedition to the Eastern Tropical Pacifi c, in charge of
Abboud - Abi Saab , M. ( 2008 ) Tintinnids of the Lebanese Alexander Agassiz, by the U.S. Fish Commision steamer
Coastal Waters (Eastern Mediterranean). CNRS - Lebanon/ “ Albatross ” from October 1904, to March, 1905, Lieut
UNEP/MAP/RAC/SPA, Lebanon, 192pp. Commander L.M. Garrett, U.S.N., commanding. V. General
Adams , J. ( 2009 ) The Holy Grail of ecology: latitudinal gradi- report of the expedition . M emoires of the Mueum of Com-
ents. InSpecies Richness: Patterns in the Diversity of Life, pp. parative Zoology Harvard , 33 , 1 – 75 .
47 – 95, Springer, Berlin. Agatha , S. ( 2003 ) Redescription of S trombidinopsis minima
Adl , S.M. , Simpson , A.G. , Farmer , M.A. , Andersen , R.A. , Ander- (Gruber, 1884) Lynn et al., 1991 (Protozoa, Ciliophora),
son , O.R. , Barta , J.R. , Bowser , S.S. , Brugerolle , G. , Fensome , with notes on its ontogenesis and distribution . European
R.A. , Fredericq , S. , James , T.Y. , Karpov , S. , Kugrens , P. , Krug , Journal of Protistology , 39 , 233 – 244 .
J. , Lane , C.E. , Lewis , L.A. , Lodge , J. , Lynn , D.H. , Mann , D.G. , Agatha , S. ( 2004a ) Evolution of ciliary patterns in the Oligo-
McCourt , R.M. , Mendoza , L. , Moestrup , O. , Mozley - Stand- trichida (Ciliophora, Spirotricha) and its taxonomic impli-
ridge , S.E. , Nerad , T.A. , Shearer , C.A. , Smirnov , A.V. , Spiegel , cations . Zoology , 107 , 153 – 168 .
F.W. & Taylor , F.J.R. ( 2005 ) The new higher level classifi cation Agatha , S. ( 2004b ) A cladistic approach for the classifi cation
of eukaryotes with emphasis on the taxonomy of protists . of oligotrichid ciliates (Ciliophora: Spirotricha) . Acta Proto-
Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 52 , 399 – 451 . zoologica , 43 , 201 – 217 .
Admiraal , W. & Venekamp , L.A.H. ( 1986 ) Signifi cance of tin- * Agatha , S. ( 2008 ) Redescription of the tintinnid ciliate T in-
tinnid grazing during blooms of Phaeocystis pouchetii (Hap- tinnopsis fi mbriata Meunier, 1919 (Spirotricha, Choreo-
tophyceae) in Dutch coastal waters . N etherlands Journal of trichida) from coastal waters of Northern Germany . D enisia ,
Sea Research , 20 , 61 – 66 . 23 , 261 – 272 .
Adolf , J.E. , Stoecker , D.K. & Harding , L.W. ( 2006 ) The balance Agatha , S. ( 2009 ) Oligotrich planktonic ciliates . In A Course
of autotrophy and heterotrophy during mixotrophic in Protozoology (ed. R. R ö ttger , R. Knight & W. Foissner ), pp.
185 – 193 , Protozoological Monographs 4 , 2 nd revised edn .,
Asterisks before a reference denote references used in Chapter 10 but Shaker Verlag , Aachen .
not necessarily cited in the chapter text. The reference provided data * Agatha , S. ( 2010a ) A light and scanning electron micro-
used in mapping the distributions of tintinnids. scopic study of the closing apparatus in tintinnid ciliates
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
244

References 245
(Ciliophora, Spirotricha, Tintinnina): a forgotten synapo- Alder , V.A. ( 1999) Tintinnoinea . In South Atlantic Zooplankton
morphy . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 57 , 297 – ( Boltovskoy , D. ed.), pp. 321 – 384 , Backhuys Publishers ,
307 . Leiden, Holland .
* Agatha , S. ( 2010b ) Redescription of T intinnopsis parvula Alldredge , A.L. & Madin , L.P. ( 1982 ) Pelagic tunicates: Unique
J ö rgensen, 1912 (Ciliophora: Spirotrichea: Tintinnina), herbivores in the marine plankton . Bioscience , 3 2 ,
including a novel lorica matrix . A cta Protozoologica , 49 , 655 – 663 .
213 – 234 . Allen , A.P. & Gillooly , J.F. ( 2006 ) Assessing latitudinal gradi-
Agatha , S. ( 2011 ) Updated hypothesis on the evolution of ents in speciation rates and biodiversity at the global scale .
oligotrichid ciliates (Ciliophora, Spirotricha, Oligotrichida) Ecology Letters , 9 , 947 – 954 .
based on somatic ciliary patterns and ontogenetic data . Altiner , D. & Ö zkan , S. ( 1991 ) Calpionellid zonation in north -
European Journal of Protistology , 47 , 51 – 56 . western Anatolia (Turkey) and claibration of the strati-
Agatha , S. & Foissner , W. ( 2009 ) Conjugation in the spirotrich graphic ranges of some benthic formanifera at the
ciliate H alteria grandinella (M ü ller, 1773) Dujardin, 1841 Jurassic - Cretaceous boundary . G eologica Romana , 27 ,
(Protozoa, Ciliophora) and its phylogenetic implications . 215 – 235 .
European Journal of Protistology , 45 , 51 – 63 . Alvarez - Cadena , J.N. ( 1993 ) Feeding of the chaetognath
* Agatha , S. & Riedel - Lorj é , J.C. ( 2006 ) Redescription of T intin- Sagitta elegans Verrill . Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science ,
nopsis cylindrica Daday, 1887 (Ciliophora: Spirotricha) and 36 , 195 – 206 .
unifi cation of tintinnid terminology . A cta Protozoologica , * Andersen , P. & S ø rensen , H.M. ( 1986 ) Population dynamics
45 , 137 – 151 . and trophic coupling in pelagic microorganisms in
Agatha , S. & Simon , P. ( 2012 ) On the nature of tintinnid eutrophic coastal waters . Marine Ecology Progress Series ,
loricae (Ciliophora: Spirotricha: Tintinnina): a histochemi- 33 , 99 – 109 .
cal, enzymatic, EDX, and high - resolution TEM study . A cta Anderson , D.M. ( 1998 ) Physiology and bloom dynamics of
Protozoologica , 51 , 1 – 19 . toxic Alexandrium species, with emphasis on life cycle tran-
Agatha , S. & Str ü der - Kypke , M.C. ( 2007 ) Phylogeny of the sitions . In Physiological Ecology of Harmful Algal Blooms
order Choreotrichida (Ciliophora, Spirotricha, Oligotrichea) ( Anderson D.M. , Cembella A.D. , Hallegraeff G.M. eds)
as inferred from morphology, ultrastructure, ontogenesis, pp. 29 – 48 , Springer , Berlin .
and SSrRNA gene sequences. E uropean Journal of Protistol- Anderson , D.M. & Keafer , B.A. ( 1987 ) An endogenous annual
ogy , 43 , 37 – 63 . clock in the toxic marine dinofl agellate G onyaulax tamaren-
Agatha , S. & Str ü der - Kypke , M.C. ( 2012 ) Reconciling cladistic sis . Nature , 325 , 616 – 617 .
and genetic analyses in choreotrichid ciliates (Protists, Anderson , D.M. & Pfi ester , L.A. ( 1987 ) Dinofl agellate repro-
Spirotricha, Oligotrichea) . J ournal of Eukaryotic Microbiol- duction . In The Biology of Dinofl agellates , ( F.J.R. Taylor ed.)
ogy , DOI: 10.1111/j.1550-7408.2012.00623.x. pp. 611 – 648 , Blackwell , Oxford .
* Agatha , S. & Tsai , S. ( 2008 ) Redescription of the tintinnid Anderson , D.M. , Aubery , D.G. , Tyler , M.A. & Coats , D.W.
Stenosemella pacifi ca Kofoid and Campbell, 1929 (Cilio- ( 1982 ) Vertical and horizontal distributions of dinofl agel-
phora, Spirotricha) based on live observation, protargol late cysts in sediments . Limnology and Oceanography , 27 ,
impregnation, and scanning electron microscopy . J ournal of 757 – 765 .
Eukaryotic Microbiology , 55 , 75 – 85 . Anderson , D.M. , Cembella , A.D. & Hallegraeff , G.M. ( 1998 )
Agatha , S. , Str ü der - Kype , M.C. & Beran , A. ( 2004a ) Morpho- Physiological Ecology of Harmful Algal Blooms . Springer -
logic and genetic variability in the marine planktonic ciliate Verlag , Berlin .
Laboea strobila Lohmann 1908 (Ciliophora, Oligotrichia), Anderson , D.M. , Taylor , C.D. & Armbrust , E.V. ( 1987 ) The
with notes on its ontogenesis . J ournal of Eukaryotic Microbi- effects of darkness and anaerobiosis on dinofl agellate cyst
ology , 51 , 267 – 281 . germination . Limnology and Oceanography , 32 , 340 – 351 .
Agatha , S. , Str ü der - Kypke , M.C. , Beran , A. & Lynn , D.H. Anderson , O.R. ( 1983 ) R adiolaria . Springer - Verlag , New York .
( 2005 ) Pelagostrobilidium neptuni (Montagnes and Taylor, 355 pp.
1994) andStrombidium biarmatum nov. spec. (Ciliophora, Anderson , O.R. ( 1993 ) The trophic role of planktonic
Oligotrichea): phylogenetic position inferred from morphol- Foraminifera and Radiolaria . Marine Microbial Food Webs ,
ogy, ontogenesis, and gene sequence data. European Journal 7 , 31 – 51 .
of Protistology , 41 , 65 – 83 . Angel , M.V. ( 1997 ) Pelagic Biodiversity. Marine Biodiversity:
* Akizawa , K. , Iwasaki , N. & Ueda , H. ( 1998 ) List of micro- patterns and processes ( Ormond R.F.G. , Gage J.D. , Angel M.V.
plankton in Uranouchi Inlet, Kochi, Japan during the eds), pp. 35 – 68 , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge .
summer of 1997 . B ulletin of Marine Sciences and Fisheries Angly , F.E. , Felts , B. , Breitbart , M. , Salamon , P. , Edwards , R.A. ,
Kochi University , 18 , 57 – 63 . Carlson , C. , Chan , A.M. , Haynes , M. , Kelley , S. , Liu , H. ,
Akselman , R. & Santinelli , N. ( 1989 ) Observaciones sobre Mahaffy , J.M. , Mueller , J.E. , Nulton , J. , Olson , R. , Parsons , R. ,
dinofl agelados parasitos en el litoral Atlantico sudocciden- Rayhawk , S. , Suttle , C.A. & Rohwer , F. ( 2006 ) The marine vi-
tal . Physis , B. Aires , Sec. A 47 , 43 – 44 . romes of four oceanic regions . P LoS Biology , 4 , 2121 – 2131 .

246 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Apple , J.K. , Strom , S.L. , Palenik , B. & Brahamsha , B. ( 2011 ) Backus , R.H. ( 1986 ) Biogeographic boundaries in the open
Variability in protist grazing and growth on different ocean. UNESCO Technical Papers in Marine S cience , 49 ,
marine Synechococcus isolates . A pplied and Environmental 9 – 13 .
Microbiology , 77 , 3074 – 3084 . Bainbridge , V. ( 1958 ) Some observations on E vadne nordmanni
Apstein , C. ( 1893 ) Ein Fall von Conjugation bei Tintinnen . Loven . J ournal of the Marine Biological Association of the
Schriften des Naturwissenschaftlichen Vereins f ü r Schleswig - United Kingdom , 37 , 349 – 370 .
Holstein , 10 , 95 – 98 . Baker , J.R. ( 1958 ) Note on the use of bromophenol blue for
Arashkevich , Y.G. ( 1969 ) The food and feeding of copepods in the histochemical recognition of protein . Q uarterly Journal
the northwestern Pacifi c . Oceanology , 9 , 695 – 705 . of Microscopical Science , 99 , 459 – 460 .
* Araujo , H.M.P. , Nascimento - Viera , D.A. , Neumann - Leit ã o , Bakker , C. & Phaff , W.J. ( 1976 ) Tintinnida from coastal waters
S. , Schwamborn , R. , Lucas , A.P.O. & Alves , J.P.H. ( 2008 ) of the S.W. - Netherlands I. The genus T intinnopsis Stein .
Zooplankton community dynamics in relation to the sea- Hydrobiologia , 50 , 101 – 111 .
sonal cycle and nutrient inputs in an urban tropical estuary Baldwin , B.S. & Newell , R.I.E. ( 1991 ) Omnivorous feeding by
in Brazil . Brazilian Journal of Biology , 68 , 751 – planktotrophic larvae of the eastern oyster Crassostrea vir-
762 . ginica . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 78 , 285 – 301 .
Armstrong , H. & Brasier , M.D. 2005 . M icrofossils , 2nd ed. , * Balech , E. ( 1942 ) Tintinnoineos del estrecho Le Marie .
Blackwell , Oxford . Physis, Buenos Aires , 19 , 242 – 254 .
Arthur , D.K. ( 1976 ) Food and feeding of larvae of three fi shes * Balech , E. ( 1944 ) Contribucion al conocimiento del plancton
occurring in the California current, Sardinops sagax , de Lennox y Cabo de Hornos . P hysis, Buenos Aires , 1 9 ,
Engraulis mordax , and Trachurus symmetricus . Fishery Bul- 423 – 446 .
letin , 74 , 517 – 530 . * Balech , E. ( 1945 ) Tintinnoinea de Quequen . P hysis, Buenos
Ascaso , C. , Wierzchos , J. , Speranza , M. , Guti é rrez , J.C. , Aires , 20 , 1 – 15 .
Gonz á lez , A.M. , de los R í os , A. & Alonso , J. ( 2005 ) Fossil * Balech , E. ( 1947 ) Contribucion al conocimiento del plancton
protists and fungi in amber and rock substrates . M icropal- antartico. Plancton del Mar de Bellingshausen . P hysis,
eontology , 51 , 59 – 72 . Buenos Aires , 20 , 75 – 91 .
Atkinson , D. , Ciotti , B.J. & Montagnes , D.J.S. ( 2003 ) Protists * Balech , E. ( 1948 ) Tintinnoinea de Atlantida (R.O. del
decrease in size linear with temperature: ca. 2.5 ° C − 1 Pro- Uruguay) . C omunicaciones del Museo Argentino de Ciencias
ceedings of the Royal Society (London) B , 270 , 2605 – Naturales “ Bernardino Rivadavia ” , Serie Ciencias Zoologicas ,
2611 . 7 , 1 – 23 .
* Ayukai , T. ( 1987 ) Predation by Acartia clausi (Copepoda: * Balech , E. ( 1957 ) Dinofl agell é s et Tintinnides de la Terre
Calanoida) on two species of tintinnids . Marine Microbial Ad é lie (Secteur fran ç ais antarctique) . V ie et Milieu , 8 ,
Food Webs , 2 , 45 – 52 . 382 – 408 .
* Ayukai , T. ( 1991 ) Standing stock of microzooplankton on * Balech , E. ( 1958 ) Plancton de la Campa ñ a Antartica Argen-
coral reefs: a preliminary study . J ournal of Plankton Research , tina . Physis, Buenos Aires , 21 , 75 – 108 .
13 , 895 – 899 . * Balech , E. ( 1959a ) The changes in the phytoplankton popu-
Azam , F. , Fenchel , T. Field , J.G. , Meyer - Reil , R.A. & Thingstad , lation off the California Coast. C ALCOFI Report 1 , 127 –
T.F. ( 1983 ) The ecological role of water column microbes 132 .
in the sea . M arine Ecology Progress Series , 10 , 257 – 263 . * Balech , E. ( 1959b ) Tintinnoinea del Mediterraneo . T rabajos
* Aziz , N.E.A. ( 2006 ) Vertical migration of zooplankton del Instituto Espa ñ ol de Oceanografi a , 28 , 1 – 88 .
groups in an eutrophic bay, Dekhaila Harbor, Alexandria, * Balech , E. ( 1962 ) Tintinnoinea y Dinofl agellata del Pacifi co
Egypt . E gyptian Journal of Aquatic Research , 32 , 135 – 157 . segun material de las expediciones Norpac y Downwind del
Bachvaroff , T.R. & Place , A.R. ( 2008 ) From stop to start: Instituto Scripps de Oceanographia . R evista del Museo
tandem gene arrangement, copy number and trans - Argentino de Ciencias Naturales “ Bernardino Rivadavia ” Insti-
splicing sites in the dinofl agellate Amphidinium carterae . tuto Nacional de Investigacion de las Ciencias Naturales , 7 ,
PLoS ONE , 3 , e2929.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002929. 3 – 249 .
Bachvaroff , T.R. , Handy , S.M. , Place , A.R. & Delwiche , C.F. Balech , E. ( 1967a ) Microplankton of the Gulf of Mexico and the
( 2011 ) Alveolate phylogeny using ribosomal proteins. Caribbean Sea. Texas A & M University Research Foundation,
Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 58 , 223 – 233 . A & M Project 382, Texas A & M University, Department of
Bachvaroff , T.R. , Kim , S. , Guillou , L. , Delwiche , C.F. & Coats , Oceanography, College Station, Texas.
D.W. ( 2012 ) Diversity of the syndinian genus E udubosc- * Balech , E. ( 1967b ) Dinofl agellates and tintinnids in the
quella based on single cell PCR . A pplied and Environmental northeastern Gulf of Mexico . B ulletin of Marine Science , 17 ,
Microbiology , (in press). 280 – 298 .
Bachy , C. , G ó mez , F. , L ó pez - Garc í a , P. , Dolan , J.R. & Moreira , Balech , E. ( 1968 ) Algunas especies nuevas o interesantes de
D. ( 2012 ) Molecular phylogeny of tintinnid ciliates (Tintin- tintinnidos del Golfo de Mexico y Caribe . R evista del Museo
nida, Ciliophora) . P rotist , 163 , in press. Argentino de Ciencias Naturales “ Bernardino Rivadavia ” e

References 247
Instituto Nacional de Investigacion de las Ciencias Naturales, * Barr í a de Cao , M.S. , Beigt , D. & Piccolo , C. ( 2005 ) Temporal
Hidrobiolog í a , 2 , 165 – 197 . variability of diversity and biomass of tintinnids (Cilio-
* Balech , E. ( 1971 ) Microplancton de la Campana Oceanogra- phora) in a southwestern Atlantic temperate estuary .
fi ca Productividad III . R evista del Museo Argentino de Ciencias Journal of Plankton Research , 27 , 1103 – 1111 .
Naturales “ Bernardino Rivadavia ” Instituto Nacional de Inves- Barth , D. , Krenek , S. , Fokin , S.I. & Berendonk , T.U. ( 2006 )
tigacion de las Ciencias Naturales, Hidrobiologia , 3 , 1 – 202 . Intraspecifi c genetic variation in Paramecium revealed by
* Balech , E. ( 1973 ) Segunda contribucion al conocimiento del mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase I sequences . J ournal of
plancton del Mar de Bellingshausen . Contribucion del Insti- Eukaryotic Microbiology , 53 , 20 – 25 .
tuto Antartico Argentino , 107 , 3 – 63 . Basu , S. , Mohan , M.L. , Luo , X. , Kundu , B. , Kong , Q. & Singh ,
* Balech , E. & El - Sayed , S.Z. ( 1965 ) Microplankton of the N. ( 2007 ) Modulation of proteinase K - resistant prion
Weddell Sea. InBiology of the Antarctic Seas , pp. 107 – 124 . protein in cells and infectious brain homogenate by redox
American Geophysical Union , Washington D.C . iron: implications for prion replication and disease patho-
* Balech , E. & Souto , S. ( 1980 ) Los tintinnidos de la campana genesis . Molecular Biology of the Cell , 18 , 3302 – 3312 .
oceanografi ca “ Productividad IV ” . Parte I . P hysis, Buenos Bathmann , U.V. , Peinert , R. , Non , T.T. & Bodungen , B.V.
Aires , 39 , 1 – 8 . ( 1990 ) Pelagic origin and fate of sedimenting particles in
* Balkis , N. ( 2004 ) Tintinnids (Protozoa: Ciliophora) of the the Norwegian Sea . Progress in Oceanography , 24 ,
B ü y ü k ç ekmece Bay in the Sea of Marmara . S cientia Marina , 117 – 125 .
68 , 33 – 44 . B é , A.W.H. & Tolderlund , D.S. ( 1971 ) Distribution and ecology
* Balkis , N. & Toklu - Ali ç h , B. ( 2009 ) Tintinnid (Protozoa: Cili- of living planktonic foraminifera in surface waters of the
ophora) species in the Edremit Bay . IUFS Journal of Biology , Atlantic and Indian Oceans. In The Micropalaeontology of
68 , 47 – 53 . Oceans ( B.M. Funnell & W.R. Riedel ed.). pp. 105 – 150 ,
Balkis , N. & Wasik , A. ( 2005 ) Species composition of the tintin- Cambridge University Press , Cambridge .
nids found in the neritic water of Bozcaada Island, Aegean Beers , C.D. ( 1948 ) Excystment in the ciliate B ursaria trunc-
Sea, Turkey . Fresenius Environmental Bulletin , 14 , 327 – 333 . atella . Biological Bulletin , 94 , 86 – 98 .
Ball , G.H. ( 1969 ) Organisms living on and in protozoa . In * Beers , J.R. & Stewart , G.L. ( 1967 ) Micro - zooplankton in
Research in Protozoology , Vol. 3 . ( T. - T. Chen ed.), pp. 565 – the euphotic zone at fi ve locations across the California
718 . Pergamon Press , Ltd, Oxford . Current . Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada ,
B å mstedt , U. , Gifford , D.J. , Irigoien , X. , et al. ( 2000 ) Feeding. 24 , 2053 – 2068 .
In ICES Zooplankton Methodology Manual ( R.P. Harris , P.H. * Beers , J.R. & Stewart , G.L. ( 1969 ) The vertical distribution
Wiebe , J. Lenz , H.R. Skjodal and M. Huntley eds), pp. 297 – of microzooplankton and some ecological observations .
399 , Academic Press , New York . Journal du Conseil International pour l ’ Exploration de la Mer ,
Banse , K. ( 1962 ) Net zooplankton and total zooplankton . 33 , 30 – 44 .
Rapports et Process - Verbaux R é union de la Conseil Interna- * Beers , J.R. & Stewart , G.L. ( 1970 ) Numerical abundance and
tional pour Exploration de la Mer , 153 , 211 – 215 . estimated biomass of microzooplankton. In ‘ The ecology of
Banse , K. ( 1982 ) Cell volumes, maximal growth rates of uni- the plankton off La Jolla, California, in the period April
cellular algae, and the role of ciliates in the marine pelagial . through September, 1967 ’ . B ulletin of the Scripps Institution
Limnology and Oceanography , 27 , 1059 – 1071 . of Oceanography , 17 , 67 – 87 .
Barbaree , J.M. , Fields , B.S. , Feeley , J.C. , Gorman , G.W. & * Beers , J.R. & Stewart , G.L. ( 1971 ) Micro - zooplankters in the
Martin , W.T. ( 1986 ) Isolation of protozoa from water asso- plankton communities of the upper waters of the eastern
ciated with a legionellosis outbreak and demonstration tropical Pacifi c . Deep - Sea Research , 18 , 861 – 883 .
of intracellular multiplication of Legionella pneumophila . Beers , J.R. ( 1982 ) An introduction and historical over-
Applied and Environmental Microbiology , 51 , 422 – 424 . view . Annales de l ’ Instutut Oc é anographique Paris , 58 (S),
* Barr í a de Cao , M.S. ( 1986 ) Contribucion al conocimiento 5 – 14 .
de Tintinnina (Protozoa, Ciliophora) de la zona de Bahia * Beers , J.R. , Reid , F.M.H. & Stewart , G.L. ( 1975 ) Microplank-
Blanca, II (Argentina) . B oletin de Institucion Espa ñ ol Ocea- ton of the North Pacifi c Central Gyre. Population structure
nografi a , 3 , 143 – 150 . and abundance, June 1973 . I nternationale Revue gesamten
Barria de Cao , M.S. ( 1992 ) Abundance and species composi- Hydrobiologie , 60 , 607 – 638 .
tion of tintinnina (Ciliophora) in Bahia Blanca Estuary, Beers , J.R. , Reid , F.M.H. & Stewart , G.L. ( 1980 ). Microplank-
Argentina . Estuarine , Coastal and Shelf Science , 34 , 295 – ton population structure in southern California nearshore
303 . waters in late spring . M arine Biology , 60 , 209 – 226 .
* Barria de Cao , M.S. , Pettigrosso , R. , Parodi , E. & Ruben , F. Bell , G. ( 1988 ) Sex and death in protozoa: the history of an
( 2003 ) Abundance and Species Composition of Planktonic obsession , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge .
Ciliophora from the Wastewater Discharge Zone in the Belmonte , G. , Miglietta , A. , Rubino , F. & Boero , F. ( 1997 )
Bahia Blanca Estuary, Argentina . Iheringia, Seria Zoologica, Morphological convergence of resting stages of planktonic
Porto Alegre , 93 , 229 – 236 . organisms: a review . H ydrobiologia , 3 55 , 159 – 165 .

248 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Bengtson , S. & Budd , B. ( 2004 ) Comment on ‘ ‘ Small bilaterian Biernacka , I. ( 1968 ) Infl uence de la salinit é et de la thermique
fossils from 40 to 55 million years before the Cambrian ’ ’ . sur les protistes de la mer Baltique et de la Lagune de la
Science , 306 , 1291a . Vistule . Ekologia Polska Seria A , 16 , 261 – 278 .
Benzaggagh , M. , Cecca , F. & Rouget , I. ( 2010 ) Biostratigraphic * Bigelow , H.B. ( 1928 ) Plankton of the offshore waters of the
distribution of ammonites and calpionellids in the Titho- Gulf of Maine . Bulletin of the Unites States Bureau of Fisher-
nian of the internal Prerif (Msila area, Morocco) . P al ä on- ies , 40 , 1 – 501 .
tologische Zeitschrift , 84 , 301 – 315 . Bignot , G. & Poignant , A. ( 2010 ) Les Pseudarcellinae, nouv-
Berger , H. ( 1999 ) M onograph of the Oxytrichidae (Cilio- elle sous - famille des Codonellidae (Tintinnida) – le genre
phora, Hypotrichia) . Monographiae Biologicae 78 , Springer, Pseudarcella et l ’ esp è ce Pseudarcella rhumbleri Spandel,
Dordrecht . 1909 – description de nouvelles esp è ces . Revue de Micropal é-
Berger , H. ( 2006 ) M onograph of the Urostyloidea (Cilio- ontologie , 53 , 107 – 119 .
phora, Hypotricha) . Monographiae Biologicae 85 , Springer, Binder , B.J. & Anderson , D.M. ( 1986 ) Green light - mediated
Dordrecht . photomorphogenesis in a dinofl agellate resting cyst . N ature ,
Berger , H. ( 2008 ) M onograph of the Amphisiellidae and Trach- 322 , 659 – 661 .
elostylidae (Ciliophora, Hypotricha) . Monographiae Biologi- * Biyu , S. ( 2000a ) A comparative study on planktonic ciliates
cae 88 , Springer, Dordrecht . in two shallow mesotrophic lakes (China): species composi-
Berges , J. ( 1997 ) Ratios, regression statistics, and “ spurious ” tion, distribution and quantitative importance . H ydrobio-
correlations . L imnology and Oceanography , 42 , 1006 – logia , 427 , 143 – 153 .
1007 . * Biyu , S. ( 2000b ) Planktonic protozooplankton (ciliates,
Berk , S.G. , Faulkner , G. , Gardu ñ o , E. , Joy , M.C. , Ortiz - Jimenez , heliozoans and testaceans) in two shallow mesotrophic
M.A. & Gardu ñ o , R.A. ( 2008 ) Packaging of live L egionella lakes in China – a comparative study between a macro-
pneumophila into pellets expelled by T etrahymena spp. does phyte - dominated lake (Biandantang) and an algal lake
not require bacterial replication and depends on a Dot/Icm - (Houhu) . H ydrobiologia , 434 , 151 – 163 .
mediated survival mechanism . Applied and Environmental * Blackbourn , D.J. ( 1974 ) The Feeding Biology of Tintinnid
Microbiology , 74 , 2187 – 2199 . Protozoa and Some Other Inshore Microzooplankton.
Berkes , F. ( 1976 ) Ecology of euphausiids in Gulf of St Law- Ph.D. Thesis. University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
rence . Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada , 33 , BC, Canada.
1894 – 1905 . Blackburn , N. & Fenchel , T. ( 1999 ) Modelling of microscale
* Bernard, C. & Rassoulzadegan , F. ( 1993 ) The role of picoplank- patch encounter by chemotactic protozoa . P rotist , 150 ,
ton (cyanobacteria and plastidic picofl agellates) in the diet 337 – 343 .
of tintinnids . J ournal of Plankton Research , 15 , 361 – 373 . Blackburn , T.M. , Cassey , P. & Gaston , K.J. ( 2006 ) Variations
Bernatzky , G. , Foissner , W. & Schubert , G. ( 1981 ) Rasterelek- on a theme: sources of heterogeneity in the form of the
tronenmikroskopische und biometrische Untersuchungen interspecifi c relationship between abundance and distribu-
ü ber die Variabilit ä t der Form, Struktur und Gr ö ß e des tion . Journal of Animal Ecology , 75 , 1426 – 1439 .
Geh ä uses einiger limnischer Tintinnina (Protozoa, Cilio- Blackford , J.C. , Allen , J.I. & Gilbert , F.J. ( 2004 ) Ecosystem
phora) . Zoologica Scripta , 10 , 81 – 90 . dynamics at six contrasting sites: a generic modelling study .
Berney , C. , Farhrni , J. & Pawlowski , J. ( 2004 ) How many novel Journal of Marine Systems , 52 , 191 – 215 .
eukaryotic ‘k ingdoms ’ ? Pitfalls and limitations of environ- Blatterer , H. & Foissner , W. ( 1990 ) Beitr ä ge zur Ciliatenfauna
mental DNA surveys . B ioMed Central Biology , 2 , 13 . (Protozoa: Ciliophora) der Amper (Bayern, Bundesrepublik
Berney , C. & Pawlowski , J. ( 2006 ) A molecular time - scale for Deutschland) . A rchiv f ü r Protistenkunde , 138 , 93 – 115 .
eukaryote evolution recalibrated with the contimuous Bockstahler , K.R. & Coats , D.W. ( 1993 ) Spatial and temporal
microfossil record. Proceedings of the Royal Society (London) aspects of mixotrophy in Chesapeake Bay dinofl agellates .
B , 273 , 1867 – 1872 . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 40 , 49 – 60 .
* Biancalana , F. , Barria de Cao , M.S. & Hoffmeyer , M. ( 2007 ) * Boikova , E. ( 1984 ) Ecological character of protozoans
Micro and mesozooplankton composition during winter (Ciliata, Flagellata) in the Baltic Sea . Ophelia, Supplement 3 ,
in Ushuaia and Golondrina Bays (Beagle Channel, Argen- 23 – 32 .
tina) . B razilian Journal of Oceanography , 55 , 83 – 95 . * Bojanic , N. ( 2001 ) Seasonal distribution of ciliated protozoa
Biernacka , I. ( 1952 ) Studia nad rozrodem nickt ó rych in Katela Bay . Journal of the Marine Biological Association of
gatunk ó w rodzaju T intinnopsis Stein. (Studies on the repro- the United Kingdom , 81 , 383 – 390 .
duction of some species of the genus Tintinnopsis Stein). * Bojanic , N. ( 2007 ) Seasonal variability in abundance and
Annales Universitatis Mariae Curie - Sklowdowska , Sec. C , 6 , biomass of tintinnids in Katela Bay (Middle Adriatic Sea) .
211 – 247 . Rapports de la Commission pour l ’ Exploration Scientifi que de la
Biernacka , I. ( 1965 ) Ausscheidung geh ä usebildender Sub- mer M é diterran é e , 38 , 438 .
stanzen durch reife Formen gewisser Arten der Gattung Boltovskoy , D. & Alder , V.A. ( 1992 ) Microzooplankton and tin-
Tintinnopsis Stein . A cta Protozoologica , 3 , 265 – 268 . tinnid species- specifi c assemblage structures: patterns of

References 249
distribution and year - to - year variations in the Weddell Sea InErgebnisse der Plankton - Expedition der Humboldt - Stiftung
(Antarctica) . J ournal of Plankton Research , 14 , 1405 – 1423 . 3 La (ed. V. Hensen ), pp. 1 – 33 + Plates 1 – 70 . Lipsius and
* Boltovskoy , D. , Alder , V.A. & Spinelli , F. ( 1989 ) Summer Tischer , Kiel, Leipzig .
Weddell Sea microplankton: Assemblage structure, distri- Brandt , K. ( 1907 ) Die Tintinnodeen der Plankton - Expedition.
bution and abundance, with special emphasis on the Tin- Systematischer Teil . In Ergebnisse der Plankton - Expedition
tinnina . P olar Biology , 9 , 447 – 456 . der Humboldt - Stiftung 3 La (ed. V. Hensen ), pp. 1 – 488 ,
* Boltovskoy , D. , Dinofrio , E.O. & Alder , V.A. ( 1990 ) Intraspe- Lipsius and Tischer , Kiel, Leipzig .
cifi c variability in Antarctic tintinnids: the C ymatocylis Braun , A. , Chen , J. , Waloszek , D. & Maas , A. ( 2007 ) First Early
affi nis / convallaria species group . Journal of Plankton Research , Cambrian Radiolaria. Geological Society, London , Special
12 , 403 – 413 . Publications , 286 , 143 – 149 .
Boltovskoy , D. , Alder , V.A. & Abelmann , A. ( 1993 ) Annual Brewer , G.D. & Kleppel , G.S. ( 1986 ) Diel vertical distribution of
fl ux of Radiolaria and other shelled plankters in the eastern fi sh larvae and their prey in nearshore waters of southern
equatorial Atlantic at 853 m : seasonal variations and poly- California . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 27 , 217 – 226 .
cystine species - specifi c responses . D eep - Sea Research I , 40 , Bristow , T.F. , Kennedy , M.F. , Derkowski , A. , Droser , M.L. , Jiang ,
1863 – 1895 . G. & Creaser , R.A. ( 2009 ) Mineralogical constraints on the
Boltovskoy , D. , Uliana , E. & Wefer , G. ( 1996 ) Seasonal varia- paleoenvironments of the Ediacaran Doushantuo Forma-
tion in the fl ux of microplankton and radiolarian assem- tion . P roceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
blage compositions in the northeastern tropical Atlantic at United States of America , 106 , 13190 – 13195 .
2.195 m . L imnology and Oceanography , 41 , 615 – 635 . Broglio , E. , Johansson , M. & Jonsson , P.R. ( 2001 ) Trophic
Bonet , F. ( 1956 ) Zonifi caci ó n microfaun í stica de las calizas interaction between copepods and ciliates: effects of prey
cret á cica del este de M é xico. XX International Geolological swimming behavior on predation risk . M arine Ecology
Congress, 3 – 102. Progress Series , 220 , 179 – 186 .
Borregaard , M.K. & Rahbek , C. ( 2010 ) Causality of the rela- Broglio , E. , J ó nasd ó ttir , H. , Calbet , A. , Jakobsen , H.H. & Saiz ,
tionship between geographic distribution and species abun- E. ( 2003 ) Effect of heterotrophic verus autotrophic food on
dance . Quarterly Review of Biology , 85 , 3 – 25 . feeding and reproduction of the calanoid copepod A cartia
* Borror , A.C. ( 1962 ) Ciliate protozoa of the Gulf of Mexico . tonsa : relationship with prey fatty acid composition . A quatic
Bulletin of Marine Science , 12 , 333 – 349 . Microbial Ecology , 31 , 267 – 278 .
Bosak , T. , Macdonald , F. , Lahr , D. & Matys , E. ( 2011 ) Putative Broglio , E. , Saiz , E. , Calbet , A. , Trepat , I. & Alcaraz , M. ( 2004 )
Cryogenian ciliates from Mongolia . G eology , 39 , 1123 – Trophic impact and prey selection by crustacean zooplank-
1126 . ton on the microbial communities of an oligotrophic
Bouley , P. & Kimmerer , W.J. ( 2006 ) Ecology of a highly abun- coastal area (NW Mediterranean Sea) . Aquatic Microbial
dant, introduced cyclopoid copepod in a temperate estuary . Ecology , 35 , 65 – 78 .
Marine Ecology Progress Series , 324 , 219 – 228 . Brown , J.H. ( 1984 ) On the relationship between abundance
Bowser , S.S. & Bernhard , J.M. ( 1993 ) Structure, bioadhesive and distribution of species . A merican Naturalist , 1 24 ,
distribution and elastic properties of the agglutinated test 255 – 279 .
of Astrammina rara (Protozoa: Foraminiferida) . Journal of * Brownlee , D.C. ( 1977 ) The Signifi cance of Cytological
Eukaryotic Microbiology , 40 , 121 – 131 . Characteristics as Revealed by Protargol Silver Staining in
Box , G.E.P. & Draper , R.D.N. ( 1987 ) Empirical Model - Building Evaluating the Systematics of the Ciliate Suborder Tintin-
and Response Surfaces , John Wiley & Sons , New York . nina. M.S. Thesis, University of Maryland, College Park
Bradbury , P.C. ( 1987 ) Protozoan adaptations for survival. In MD, USA.
Survival and Dormancy of Microorganisms . Henis , Y. (ed), pp. Brownlee , D.C. ( 1982 ) Measuring the Secondary Production
267 – 299 . Wiley & Sons , New York . of Marine Planktonic Tintinnine Ciliates. Ph.D. Thesis.
* Brandini , F.P. ( 1993 ) Phytoplankton biomass on an Antarc- University of Maryland, College Park MD, USA.
tic coastal environment during stable water conditions – * Brownlee , D.C. & Jacobs , F. ( 1987 ) Mesozooplankton and
implications for the iron limitation theory . M arine Ecology microzooplankton in the Chesapeake Bay . In Contaminant
Progress Series , 93 , 267 – 275 . Problems and Management of Living Chesapeake Bay Resources ,
Brandt , K. ( 1901 ) Life in the ocean. Annual Report of the ( S.K. Majumdar L.W. Hall and & H.M. Austin eds),
Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution 1901, pp. 217 – 269 , Pennsylvannia Academy of Science , Phila-
pp. 493 – 506 . delphia, PA, USA .
Brandt , K. ( 1905 ) On the production and conditions of pro- Brunnschweiler , R.O. ( 1951 ) Discovery of the Late Jurassic
duction in the sea.Rapports et Proc è s - Verbaux des R é unions, genus Calpionella Lorenz (Oligotrich Infusoria) in Aus-
Conseil International pour l ’ Exploration de la Mer, 3 , appendix tralia . Australian Journal of Science , 14 , 94 .
D 12 pp. Bugrova , E.M. ( 1983 ) New records of tintinnids (Infusoria)
Brandt , K. ( 1906 ) Die Tintinnodeen der Plankton - Expedition. from the Eocene of the southern part of the USSR . P aleon-
Tafelerkl ä rungen nebst kurzer Diagnose der neuen Arten . tological Journal , 8 , 78 – 81 .

250 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Bugrova , E.M. ( 2003 ) Paleogene ciliates and problematic Butler , G.H. , Kotani , H. , Kong , L. et al. ( 1991 ) Identifi cation
microfossils from the northeastern margins of the Tethys and characterization of proteinase K - resistant proteins in
Basin . P aleontological Journal , 37 , 1 – 7 . members of the class Mollicutes . I nfection and Immunity ,
Buitenhuis , E.T. , Rivkin , R.B. , Sailley , S. & Le Qu é r é , C. ( 2010 ) 59 , 1037 – 1042 .
Biogeochemical fl uxes through microzooplankton . G lobal B ü tschli , O. ( 1887 – 1889 ) Erster Band. Protozoa. III.
Biogeochemical Cycles , 24 , DOI: 10.1029/2009GB003601. Abtheilung. Infusoria und System der Radiolaria . In K lassen
Burkill , P.H. ( 1982 ) Ciliates and other microplankton compo- und Ordnungen des Thier - Reichs, wissenschaftlich dargestellt in
nents of a near - shore food - web: Standing stocks and pro- Wort und Bild ( H.G. Bronn ed.), pp. 1089 – 2035 (1887:
duction processes . A nnales Institut Oc é anographique Paris , 1089 – 1280, 1888: 1281 – 1584, 1889: 1585 – 2035). C.F.
58 (S), 335 – 350 . Winter ’ sche Verlagshandlung , Leipzig .
Burkill , P.H. , Mantoura , R.F.C. , Llewellyn , C.A. & Owens , N.P.J. Buzas , M.A. , Collins , L.S. & Culvert , S.J. ( 2002 ) Latitudinal
( 1987 ) Microzooplankton grazing and selectivity of phyto- difference in biodiversity caused by higher tropical rate of
plankton in coastal waters . M arine Biology , 93 , 581 – 590 . increase . P roceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
Burkovsky , I.V. ( 1973 ) Variability of P arafavella denticulata in the United States of America , 99 , 7841 – 7843 .
the White Sea . Zoologicheskii Zhurnal , 52 , 1277 – 1285 . Cachon , J. ( 1964 ) Contribution a l ’ é tude des p é ridiniens
* Burkovsky , I.V. ( 1976 ) New data on tintinnids (Ciliata) of the parasites. Cytologie, cycles é volutifs . Annales des Sciences
Arctic and revision of fauna . Zoologicheskii Zhurnal , 55 , Naturelles – Zoologie et Biologie Animale , 6 , 1 – 158 .
325 – 336 . Cachon , J. & Cachon , M. ( 1987 ) Parasitic dinofl agellates . In
* Burkovsky , I.V. , Zamyshlyak , E.A. & Poskryakova , N.P. ( 1974 ) The Biology of Dinofl agellates ( F.J.R. Taylor ed.), pp. 571 –
Revision of the Tintinnida (Ciliata) fauna of the White Sea . 610 , Blackwell , Oxford .
Zoologicheskii Zhurnal , 53 , 1757 – 1766 . Cai , S. , Song , W. , Xu , D. & Chiang , K. ( 2006 ) Morphological
* Burns , D.A. ( 1983 ) The distribution and morphology of tin- studies on the infraciliature of a planktonic ciliate, T intin-
tinnids (ciliate protozoans) from coastal waters around nopsis brasiliensis (Ciliophora: Tintinina) . Journal of Ocean
New Zealand . New Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater University of China , 5 , 55 – 57 .
Research , 17 , 387 – 406 . Calado , A.J. , Craveiro , S.C. , Daugbjerg , N. & Moestrup , Ø .
* Bursa , A.S. ( 1961 ) The annual oceanographic cycle at Igloo- ( 2009 ) Description of T yrannodinium gen. nov., a fresh-
lik in the Canadian Arctic. II. Phytoplankton . Journal of the water dinofl agellate closely related to the marine P fi esteria -
Fisheries Research Board of Canada , 18 , 563 – 615 . like species . J ournal of Phycology , 45 , 1195 – 1205 .
Busch , W. ( 1920 ) Dauercysten bei C yttarocylis edentata var. Calbet , A. ( 2008 ) The trophic roles of microzooplankton in
parumdentata Brandt . Archiv f ü r Hydrobiologie , 12 , 756 – marine systems . I CES Journal of Marine Science , 65 , 325 .
758 . Calbet , A. & Landry , M.R. ( 1999 ) Mesozooplankton infl u-
Busch , W. ( 1925 ) Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Geh ä usebildung ences on the microbial food web: Direct and indirect trophic
bei den Tintinnidae und zur Kenntnis mariner Ciliaten . interactions in the oligotrophic open ocean . Limnology and
Archiv f ü r Protistenkunde , 53 , 183 – 190 . Oceanography , 44 , 1370 – 1380 .
Busch , W. ( 1948 ) Mitteilung von Beobachtungen an marinen Calbet , A. & Landry , M.R. ( 2004 ) Phytoplankton growth,
Tintinnoinea . M itteilungen aus dem Museum f ü r Naturkunde microzooplankton grazing, and carbon cycling in marine
und Vorgeschichte und dem naturwissenschaftlichen Arbeits- systems . L imnology and Oceanography , 49 , 51 – 57 .
kreis zu Magdeburg , 1 , 121 – 135 . Calbet , A. & Saiz , E. ( 2005 ) The ciliate – copepod link in marine
Buskey , E.J. & Stoecker , D.K. ( 1988 ) Locomotory patterns of ecosystems . A quatic Microbial Ecology , 3 8 , 157 – 167 .
the planktonic ciliate F avella sp.: Adaptations for remaining * Calderon - Aragon , L.D.C. & Lopez - Ochoterena , E. ( 1973 ) Pro-
within food patches . B ulletin of Marine Science , 43 , tozarios ciliados de Mexico. XX Sistematica y morfologia de
783 – 796 . algunas especies del orden Tintinnida Kofoid y Campbell,
Buskey , E.J. & Stoecker , D.K. ( 1989 ) Behavioral responses of del Noroeste del Golfo de Mexico . R evista de la Sociedad Mexi-
the marine tintinnidFavella sp. to phytoplankton: infl uence cana de Historia Natural , 34 , 71 – 86 .
of chemical, mechanical and photic stimuli . J ournal of Calvo , P. , Fernandez - Aliseda , M.C. , Garrido , J. & Torres , A.
Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology , 1 32 , 1 – 16 . ( 2003 ) Ultrastructure, encystment and cyst wall composi-
Buskey , E.J. , Coulter , C. & Strom , S. ( 1993 ) Locomotory tion of the resting cyst of the peritrich ciliate O pisthonecta
patterns of microzooplankton – potential effects on food henneguyi . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 50 , 49 – 56 .
selectivity of larval fi sh . B ulletin of Marine Science , 5 3 , 29 – Campbell , A. ( 1954 ) Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology. Tin-
43 . tinnina. Protista 3 ( A. Campbell , A. and R.C. Moore eds), pp.
Bussers , J.C. ( 1984 ) Les appareils protecteurs des infusoires 166 – 180 , Kansas University Press , Lawrence .
cili é s . In Trait é de Zoologie, Cili é s, Tome II, Fasicule I ( P.P. * Campbell , A.S. ( 1926 ) On Tintinnus neriticus, sp. nov., from
Grass é ed.), pp. 439 – 455 Masson , Paris . San Francisco Bay . U niversity of California Publications in
Bussers , J.C. & Jeuniaux , C. ( 1974 ) Recherche de la chitine Zoology , 29 , 237 – 239 .
dans les productions m é taplasmatiques de quelques cili é s . * Campbell , A.S. ( 1926 ) The cytology of T intinnopsis nucula
Protistologica , 10 , 43 – 46 . (Fol) Laackmann with an account of its neuromotor appa-

References 251
ratus, division, and a new intranuclear parasite . U niversity Carey , PG. ( 1992 ) Marine Interstitial Ciliates . Chapman and
of California Publications in Zoology , 29 , 179 – 236 . Hall , London .
* Campbell , A.S. ( 1927 ) Studies on the marine ciliate F avella * Cariou , J. - B. , Dolan , J.R. & Dallot , S. ( 1999 ) A preliminary
(J ö rgensen), with special regard to the neuromotor appara- study of tintinnid diversity in the NW Mediterranean Sea .
tus and its r ô le in the formation of the lorica . U niversity Journal of Plankton Research , 21 , 1065 – 1075 .
of California Publications in Zoology , 29 , 429 – 452 + Plates Carlsson , P. , Gran é li , E. & Olsson , P. ( 1990 ) Grazer elimination
21, 22. through poisoning: one of the mechanisms behind Chryso-
Campbell , A.S. ( 1942 ) The Oceanic Tintinnoina of the Plankton chromulina polylepis blooms. In Toxic marine phytoplankton
Gathered during the Last Cruise of the Carnegie . Scientifi c ( E. Gran é li , B. Sundstr ö m , L. Edler and D.M. Anderson eds),
Results of Cruise VII of the Carnegie during 1928 – 1929 pp. 116 – 122 , Elsevier , New York .
under Command of Captain J. P. Ault, Biology II. Publica- Caron , D.A. & B é , A.W.H. ( 1984 ) Predicted and observed
tion537 , Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washing- feeding rates of the spinose planktonic foraminifer G lo-
ton, D.C. bigerinoides sacculifer . Bulletin of Marine Science , 35 , 1 – 10 .
Canter , H.M. & Dick , M.W. ( 1994 ) E urychasmopsis multise- Caron , D.A. & Swanberg , N.R. ( 1990 ) The ecology of plank-
cunda gen. et sp. nov., a parasite of the suctorian ciliate tonic sarcodines . R eviews in Aquatic Sciences , 3 , 147 – 180 .
Podophrya . Mycological Research , 98 , 105 – 117 . Caron , D.A. , Davis , P.G. & Madin , L.P. ( 1982 ) Heterotrophic
Canter , H.M. , Heaney , S.I. & Lund , J.W.G. ( 1990 ) The ecologi- bacteria and bacterivorous protozoa in oceanic macroag-
cal signifi cance of grazing on planktonic populations of gragates . Science , 218 , 795 – 797 .
cyanobacteria by the ciliate Nassula . N ew Phytologist , 114 , Carpenter , E.J. & Foster , R.A. ( 2003 ) Marine cyanobacterial
247 – 263 . symbioses. In Cyanobacteria in Symbiosis ( A.N. Rai , B. Berg-
Cantu - Chapa , A. ( 1996 ) Qu é hacer con las calpionelas del mann and U. Rasmussen eds), pp. 11 – 17 , Kluwer ,
l í mite Jur á sico - Cret á cio? R evista Espangol de Micropaleon- Amsterdam .
togica , 28 , 57 – 65 . * Carrick , H.J. ( 2005 ) An under - appreciated component of
Caperon , J. , Schell , D. , Hirota , J. & Laws , E. ( 1979 ) Ammo- biodiversity in plankton communities: the role of protozoa
nium excretion rates in Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii, measured in Lake Michigan (a case study) . H ydrobiologia , 551 ,
by a 15 - N isotope dilution technique . M arine Biology , 54 , 17 – 32 .
33 – 40 . Carrick , H.J. , Fahnenstiel , G.L. & Taylor , W.D. 1992 . Growth
Capriulo , G.M. ( 1982 ) The Feeding Ecology of Temperate and production of planktonic protozoa in Lake Michigan:
Zone Coastal Water Tintinnids. Ph.D. Thesis, State Univer- in situ versus in vitro comparisons and importance to
sity of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY. food web dynamics . Limnology and Oceanography , 3 7 ,
* Capriulo , G.M. ( 1982 ) Feeding of fi eld collected tintinnid 1221 – 1235 .
microzooplankton on natural food . M arine Biology , 71 , * Casagranda , C. & Boudouresque , C.F. ( 2010 ) A fi rst quantifi -
73 – 86 . cation of the overall biomass, from phytoplankton to birds,
Capriulo , G.M. ( 1990 ) Ecology of Marine Protozoa , Oxford Uni- of a Mediterranean brackish lagoon: revisiting the ecosys-
versity Press , Oxford . tem of Lake Ichkeul (Tunisia). H ydrobiologia 637 , 73 – 85 .
Capriulo , G.M. & Carpenter , E.J. ( 1980 ) Grazing by 35 to Cermano , P. , Dutkiewicz , S. , Harris , R.P. , Follows , M. ,
202 um micro - zooplankton in Long Island Sound . M arine Schofi eld , O. & Falkowski , P.G. ( 2008 ) The role of nutricline
Biology , 56 , 319 – 326 . depth in regulating the ocean carbon cycle . P roceedings
* Capriulo, G.M. & Carpenter , E.J. ( 1983 ) Abundance, species of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
composition and feeding impact of tintinnid micro - zoo- America , 105 , 20344 – 20349 .
plankton in Central Long Island Sound . M arine Ecology Chambouvet , A. , Alves - de - Souza , C. Cueff , V. , Marie , D.
Progress Series , 10 , 277 – 288 . Karpov , S. & Guillou , L. ( 2011 ) Interplay between the para-
* Capriulo , G.M. & Ninivaggi , D.V. ( 1982 ) A comparison of the siteAmoebophrya sp. (Alveolata) and the cyst formation of
feeding activities of fi eld collected tintinnids and copepods the red tide dinofl agellate Scrippsiella trochoidea . P rotist ,
fed identical natural particle assemblages . A nnales de 162 , 637 – 649 .
L ’ institute Oceanographique Paris , 58 (S), 325 – 334 . Chandrasekera , W.U. & Fernando , M.A.S.T. ( 2009 ) Accidental
Capriulo , G.M. , Gold , K. & Okubo , A. ( 1982 ) Evolution of the introduction of alien plankton into the Sr Lankan coastal
lorica in tintinnids: a possible selective advantage . A nnales zone through ballast water of cargo ships . S ri Lanka Journal
Institut Oc é anographique Paris , 58 (S), 319 – 324 . of Aquatic Sciences , 14 , 87 – 103 .
* Capriulo , G.M. , Taveras , J. & Gold , K. ( 1986 ) Ciliate feeding: * Chang , F.H. ( 1983 ) Winter phytoplankton and microzoo-
effect of food presence or absence on occurrence of striae in plankton populations off the coast of Westland, New
tintinnids . M arine Ecology Progress Series , 30 , 145 – 158 . Zealand, 1979 . N ew Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwa-
* Cardinal, A. , Lafl eur , P. - E. & Bonneau , E. ( 1977 ) Les tintin- ter Research , 17 , 279 – 304 .
nides (Ciliata: Tintinnida) des eaux marines et saumatres * Chang , F.H. ( 1990 ) Quantitative distribution of microzoo-
du Quebec. I. Formes hyalines. A cta Protozoologica 16 , plankton off Westland, New Zealand . New Zealand Journal
15 – 22 . of Marine and Freshwater Research , 24 , 187 – 195 .

252 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Chatton , E. ( 1920 ) Les peridiniens parasites. Morphologie, Clough , J. & Strom , S. ( 2005 ) Effects of H eterosigma akashiwo
reproduction, ethologie . A rchives Zoologie Experimentale (Raphidophyceae) on protist grazers: laboratory experi-
Generale , 59 , 1 – 475 . ments with ciliates and heterotrophic dinofl agellates .
Chatton , E. ( 1952 ) Classe des Dinofl agell é s ou P é ridiniens . In Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 39 , 121 – 134 .
Trait é de Zoologie , Vol. 1 (ed. P.P. Grass é , P.P. ), pp. 309 – 390 , * Coats , D.W. ( 1988 ) D uboscquella cachoni N. Sp., a parasitic
Masson et Cie , Paris . dinofl agellate lethal to its tintinnine host Eutintinnus pecti-
Chatton , E. & Biecheler , B. 1936 . Documents nouveaux rela- nis . Journal of Protozoology , 35 , 607 – 617 .
tives aux Coccidinides (Dinofl agell é s parasites). La sexualit é Coats , D.W. ( 1999 ) Parasitic life styles of marine dinofl agel-
duCoccidinium mesnili n. sp . C omptes Rendues Academie Sci- lates . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 46 , 402 – 409 .
ences, Paris , 203 , 573 – 576 . * Coats , D.W. & Heinbokel , J.F. ( 1982 ) A study of reproduction
Chatton , E. , Lwoff , A. , Lwoff , M. & Monod , J.L. ( 1931 ) La for- and other life cycle phenomena in planktonic protists using
mation de l ’ é bauche buccale post é rieur chez les cili é s en an acridine orange fl uorescence technique . M arine Biology ,
division et ses relation de continuit é topographique et g é n é- 67 , 71 – 79 .
tique avec la bouche ant é rieure . C omptes Rendus de la Soci é t é * Coats , D.W. & Heisler , J.J. ( 1989 ) Spatial and temporal occur-
de Biologie, Paris , 107 , 540 – 548 . rence of the parasitic dinofl agellate D ubosquella cachoni and
Chen , J. - Y. , Bottjer , D.J. , Li , G. , Hadfi eld , M.G. , Gao , F. , Cameron , its tintinnine hostEutintinnus pectinis in Chesapeake Bay .
A.R. , Zhang , C. - Y. , Xian , D. - C. , Tafforeau , P. , Liao , X. & Yin , Marine Biology , 101 , 401 – 409 .
Z. - J. ( 2009 ) Complex embryos displaying bilaterian charac- Coats , D.W. , Bockstahler , K.R. , Berg , G.M. & Sniezek , J.H.
ters from Precambrian Doushantuo phosphate deposits, ( 1994 ) Dinofl agellate infections of Favella panamensis from
Weng ’ an, Guizhou, China . Proceedings of the National two North American estuaries . M arine Biology , 1 19 ,
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 1 06 , 105 – 113 .
19056 – 19060 . * Coats , D.W. , Kim , S. , Bachvaroff , T.R. , Handy , S.M. & Del-
* Chen , Y. & Yang , Y. ( 2009 ) Characteristics of the microzoo- wiche , C.F. ( 2010 ) T intinnophagus acutus n. g., n. sp.
plankton community in Jiaozhou Bay, Qingdao, China . (Phylum Dinofl agellata), an ectoparasite of the ciliate T in-
Chinese Journal of Oceanology and Limnology , 27 , 435 – tinnopsis cylindrica Daday 1887, and its relationship to
442 . Duboscquodinium collini Grass é 1952 . Journal of Eukaryotic
Chennaux , G. ( 1968 ) Pr é sence de tintinnoidiens dans Microbiology , 57 , 468 – 482 .
l ’ Ordovcien du Sahara . C omptes Rendues de l ’ Academie de Coats , D.W. , Bachvaroff , T.R. & Delwiche , C.F. ( 2012 ) Revision
Science (France), serie D , 266 , 86 – 87 . of the family Duboscquellidae with description of E udu-
* Chester , A.J. ( 1978 ) Microzooplankton in the surface waters boscquella crenulata n. gen., n. sp. (Dinofl agellata, Synd-
of the Strait of Juan de Fuca. NOAA Technical Report ERL inea), an intracellular parasite of the ciliate Favella
403 - PMEL 30. panamensis Kofoid and Campbell, 1929 . J ournal of Eukaryo-
* Choi , J.K. , Coats , D.W. , Brownlee , D.C. & Small , E.B. ( 1992 ) tic Microbiology , 8 5 , in press.
Morphology and infraciliature of three species of E utin- Colin , S.P. & Dam , H.G. ( 2003 ) Effects of the toxic dinofl agel-
tinnus (Ciliophora; Tintinnina) with guidelines for inter- late A lexandrium fundyense on the copepod A cartia hud-
preting protargol - stained tintinnine ciliates . J ournal of sonica : a test of the mechanisms that reduce ingestion rates .
Protozoology , 39 , 80 – 92 . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 248 , 55 – 65 .
Clapar è de , É . & Lachmann , J. ( 1858 ) É tudes sur les infusoires Colin , S.P. , Costello , J.H. , Graham , W.M. & Higgins III ,
et les rhizopodes . M é moires de l ’ Institut National Genevois , 5 J. ( 2005 ) Omnivory by the small cosmopolitan hy-
(year 1857), 1 – 260 + Plates 1 – 13 . dromedusa Aglaura hemistoma . L imnology and Oceanogra-
Clarke , A. ( 1992 ) Is there a latitudinal diversity cline in the phy , 50 , 1264 – 1268 .
sea? Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 7 , 286 – 287 . Colom , G. ( 1934 ) Estudios sobre las Calpionela . B oletí n de la
* Cleve , P.T. ( 1899 ) Plankton collected by the Swedish expedi- Sociedad Espa ñ ola de Historia Natural , 34 , 379 – 388 .
tion to Spitzbergen in 1898 . K ongl Svenska Vetenskaps - Akad- Colom , G. ( 1948 ) Fossil tintinnids: loricated infusoria of
emiens Handlingar 32 , 51 p. the order of the oligotricha . Journal of Paleontology , 22 ,
* Cleve , P.T. ( 1900a ) Plankton from the southern Atlantic and 233 – 263 .
the sourthern Indian Ocean. Ofversigt af Kongl . V etenskaps - Colom , G. ( 1955 ) Jurassic - Cretaceous pelagic sediments of
Akademiens F ö rhandlingar , 57 , 919 – 938 . the western Mediterranean zone and the Atlantic Ocean .
* Cleve , P.T. ( 1900b ) Some Atlantic Tintinnodea. Ofversigt Micropaleontology , 1 , 109 – 124 .
af Kongl . Vetenskaps - Akademiens F ö rhandlingar , 56 , 969 – Colom , G. ( 1965 ) Essais sur la biologie, la distribution geo -
975 . graphique et stratigraphique des tintinnoidiens fossiles .
Cleven , E - J. ( 1996 ) Indirectly fl uorescently labelled fl agel- Ecolgae Geologica Helvetica . 58 , 319 – 334 .
lates (IFLF): a tool to estimate the predation on free - living Conover , R.J. ( 1982 ) Interactions between microzooplankton
heterotrophic fl agellates . Journal of Plankton Research , 18 , and other plankton organisms . A nnales de l ’ Institut Oc é ano-
429 – 442 . graphique, Paris , 58 (Supplement), 31 – 46 .

References 253
Conway , D.V.P. ( 1980 ) The food of larval blue whiting, M icro- cations of the University of Sydney. Department of zoology ,
mesistius poutassou (Risso), in the Rockall area . J ournal Fish Monograph no. l, 215 pp.
Biology , 16 , 709 – 723 . * Dale , T. ( 1987 ) Diel vertical distribution of planktonic ciliates
* Cordeiro , T.A. , Brandini , F.P. & Martens , P. ( 1997 ) Spatial in Lindaspollene, western Norway . M arine Microbial Food
distribution of the Tintinnina (Ciliophora, Protista) in the Webs , 2 , 15 – 28 .
North Sea, spring of 1986 . J ournal of Plankton Research , 1 9 , * Dale , T. ( 1988 ) Oil pollution and plankton dynamics. VI.
1371 – 1383 . Controlled ecosystem experiments in Lindaspollene,
Corliss , B.H. , Brown , C.W. , Sun , X. & Showers , W.J. ( 2009 ) Norway, June 1981: Effects on planktonic ciliates following
Deep - sea benthic diversity linked to seasonality of pelagic nutrient addition to natural and oil -p olluted enclosed water
productivity . Deep - Sea Research I 56 , 835 – 841 . columns . S arsia , 73 , 179 – 191 .
Corliss , J.O. ( 1973 ) Protozoan ecology: a note on its current * Dale , T. ( 1989 ) Sedimentation of loricas of tintinnids (Ciliata,
status . American Zoologist , 13 , 145 – 148 . Protozoa) and shells of bivalve larvae in the landlocked
Corliss , J.O. ( 1979 ) T he Ciliated Protozoa. Characterization, Clas- fjord, Lindaspollene, Norway . A rchiv f ü r Protistenkunde ,
sifi cation and Guide to the Literature , 2nd edition . Pergamon 137 , 45 – 55 .
Press , Oxford . * Dale , T. & Dahl , E. ( 1987 ) Mass occurrence of planktonic
Corliss , J.O. & Esser , S.C. ( 1974 ) Comments on the role of the oligotrichous ciliates in a bay in southern Norway . Journal
cyst in the life cycle and survival of freeliving protozoa . of Plankton Research , 9 , 871 – 879 .
Transactions of the American Microscopical Society , 9 5 , Damodara , N.W. ( 1981 ) Studies on Tintinnids (Protozoa:
578 – 593 . Ciliata) of Proto Novo Region, S. India. Ph.D. Thesis,
* Cosper , T.C. ( 1972 ) The identifi cation of tintinnids (Proto- Annamalai University, Tamil Nadu, India.
zoa: Ciliata: Tintinnida) of the St. Andrew Bay system, Darling , K.F. , Kucera , M. , Pudsey , C.J. & Wade , C.M. ( 2004 )
Florida . Bulletin of Marine Science , 22 , 391 – 418 . Molecular evidence links cryptic diversifi cation in polar
Costello , J.H. & Coverdale , R. ( 1998 ) Planktonic feeding and planktonic protists to Quaternary climate dynamics . P ro-
evolutionary signifi cance of the lobate “ body ” plan within ceedings National Academy of Sciences the United States , 101 ,
the Ctenophora . Biological Bulletin , 195 , 247 – 248 . 7657 – 7662 .
Courtois , R. & D odson , J.J. ( 1986 ) R é gime alimentaire et prin- Darwin , C. ( 1859 ) On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural
cipaux facteurs infl uen ç ant l ’ alimentation des larves de Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle
capelan ( Mallotus villosus) , d ’ é perlan (O smerus mordax ) et for Life . John Murray , London .
de hareng (C lupea harengus harengus ) dans un estuaire par- Davenport , J. , Smith , R.J.J.W. & Packer , M. ( 2000 ) Mussels
tiellement m é lang é . C anadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Mytilus edulis : signifi cant consumers and destroyers of
Science , 43 , 968 – 979 . mesozooplankton . M arine Ecology Progress Series , 198 ,
Cromer , L. , Gibson , J.A.E. , Swadling , K.M. & Ritz , D.A. ( 2005 ) 131 – 137 .
Faunal microfossils: indicators of Holocene ecological David , M. , Gollasch , S. , Cabrini , M. , Perkovic , M. , Bosnjak , D.
change in a saline Antarctic lake . Paleogeography, Palaeocli- & Virgilio , D. ( 2007 ) Results from the fi rst ballast water
matology, Palaeoecology , 221 , 83 – 97 . sampling study in the Mediterranean Sea – the Port of
Cunha , A.M. da & Fonseca , O. da ( 1917 ) O microplancton do Koper study . Marine Pollution Bulletin , 54 , 53 – 65 .
Atlantico nas imedia ç õ es de Mar del Plata . M emorias do * Davis , C.C. ( 1978 ) Variations of the lorica in the genus P ara-
Instituto Oswaldo Cruz , 9 , 140 – 142 . favella (Protozoa: Tintinnida) in northern Norway waters .
Curds , C.R. & Wu , I.C.H. ( 1983 ) A review of the Euplotidae Canadian Journal of Zoology , 56 , 1822 – 1827 .
(Hypotrichida, Ciliophora) . Bulletin of the British Museum Davis , C.C. ( 1981 ) Variations of lorica shape in the genus
of Natural History (Zoology) , 44 , 191 – 247 . Ptychocylis (Protozoa: Tintinnina) in relation to species
Cuvillier , J . & Barreyre , M. ( 1964 ) Presence de tintinnoidiens identifi cation . J ournal of Plankton Research , 3 , 433 –
dans le Vis é en des Asturias . R evue de Micropaleontologie , 7 , 443 .
80 – 81 . * Davis , C.C. ( 1982 ) A preliminary quantitative study of the
Cuvillier , J. & Sacal , V. ( 1963 ) Presence de tintinnoidiens dans zooplankton from Conception Bay, insular Newfoundland,
le Devoinian superieur du Sahara septronial . R evue de Canada . Internationale Revue gesamten Hydrobiologie , 67 ,
Micropaleontologie , 6 , 73 – 75 . 713 – 747 .
Daday , E. von ( 1886 ) Kenntnis der Infusorien - Fauna des Davis , C.C. ( 1985 ) A canthostomella norvegica (Daday) in
Golfes von Neapel. M ittheilungen aus der Zoologischen Station Insular Newfoundland waters, Canada (Protozoa: Tintin-
zu Neapel , 6 , 33 – 498 . nina) . Internationale Revue der Gesamten Hydrobiologie , 70 ,
Daday , E. von ( 1887 ) Monographie der Familie der Tintinno- 21 – 26 .
deen . M ittheilungen aus der Zoologischen Station zu Neapel , 7 , * Davis , C.C. ( 1986 ) A comparison of the zooplankton in two
473 – 591 . Newfoundland bays with differing infl uences from major
* Dakin , W.J. & Colefax , A.N. ( 1940 ) The plankton of the Aus- currents . Internationale Revue gesamten Hydrobiologie , 71 ,
tralian coastal waters off New South Wales. Part 1 . Publi- 11 – 47 .

254 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
* de Faria , J.G. & Cunha , A.M. ( 1917 ) Estudios sobre o micro- Dolan , J.R. ( 2011 ) The legacy of the last cruise of the Carn-
plancton da ba ¡ a Rio de Janero e suas imediatoes . M emorias egie: a lesson in the value of dusty old taxonomic mono-
do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz , 9 , 68 – 93 . graphs . Journal of Plankton Research 33 , 1317 – 1324 .
De Vargas , C. , Norris , R. , Zaninetti , L. , Gibb , S.W. & Pawlowski , * Dolan , J.R. & Coats , D.W. ( 1991 ) Changes in fi ne - scale verti-
J. ( 1999 ) Molecular evidence of cryptic speciation in plank- cal distributions of ciliate microzooplankton related to
tonic foraminifera and their relation to oceanic provinces . anoxia in Chesapeake Bay waters . M arine Microbial Food
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United Webs , 5 , 81 – 93 .
States of America , 96 , 2864 – 2868 . Dolan , J.R. & Gallegos , C.L. ( 1991 ) Trophic coupling of rotif-
Dennett , M.R. , Caron , D.A. , Murzov , S.A. , Polikarpov , I.G. , ers, microfl agellates, and bacteria during fall months in the
Gavrilova , N.A. , Georgieva , L.V. & Kuzmenko , L.V. 1999 . Rhode River Estuary . M arine Ecology Progress Sereries , 7 7 ,
Abundance and biomass of nano - and microplankton 147 – 156 .
during the 1995 Northeast Monsoon and Spring Inter- Dolan , J.R. & Gallegos , C.L. ( 1992 ) Trophic role of planktonic
monsoon in the Arabian Sea . D eep - Sea Research II , 46 , rotifers in the Rhode River Estuary, spring – summer 1991 .
1691 – 1717 . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 85 , 187 – 199 .
Deroux , G. ( 1974 ) Quelques pr é cisions sur S trobilidium gyrans * Dolan , J.R. & Gallegos , C.L. ( 2001 ) Estuarine diversity of tin-
Schewiakoff . Cahiers de Biologie Marine , 15 , 571 – 588 . tinnids (planktonic ciliates) . Journal of Plankton Research ,
Detwyler , R. & Houde , E.D. ( 1970 ) Food selection by laboratory - 23 , 1009 – 1027 .
reared larvae of the scaled sardine H arengula pensacolae Dolan , J.R. & McKeon , K. ( 2004 ) The reliability of grazing rate
(Pisces, Clupeidae) and the bay anchovy Anchoa mitchilli estimates from dilution experiments: Have we over -
(Pisces, Engraulidae) . M arine Biology , 7 , 214 – 222 . estimated rates of organic carbon consumption? O cean
* Diodato , S.L. & Hoffmeyer , M.S. ( 2008 ) Contribution of Science , 1 , 1 – 7 .
planktonic and detritic fractions to the natural diet of mes- Dolan , J.R. & Stoeck , T. ( 2011 ) Repeated sampling reveals dif-
ozooplankton in Bahia Blanca Estuary . H ydrobiologia , 614 , ferential variability in measures of species richness and
83 – 90 . community composition in planktonic protists . Environ-
Dobson , A. , Lafferty , K.D. , Kuris , A.M. , Hechinger , R.F. & Jetz , mental Microbiology Reports , 3 , 661 – 666 .
W. ( 2008 ) Homage to Linnaeus: How many parasites? How * Dolan , J.R. , Gallegos , C.L. & Moigis , A. ( 2000 ) Dilution effects
many hosts? P roceedings of the National Academy of Sciences on microzooplankton in dilution grazing experiments .
of the United States of America 1 05 (Supplement 1), Marine Ecology Progress Series , 200 , 127 – 139 .
11482 – 11489 . Dolan , J.R. , Clauste , H. , Carlotti , F. , Plounevez , S. , Moutin , T.
Dobzhansky , T. ( 1964 ) Biology, molecular and organismic . ( 2002 ) Microzooplankton diveristy: relationships of tintin-
American Zoologist , 4 , 443 – 452 . nid ciliates with reources, competitors and predators from
Dodge , J.D. & Lee , J.J. ( 2000 ). Phylum Dinofl agellata (B ü tschli, the Atlantic Coast of Morocco to the Eastern Mediterra-
1885). In An Illustrated Guide to the Protozoa ( J.J. Lee , G.F. nean . Deep - Sea Research I , 49 , 1217 – 1232 .
Leedale , G.F. and P. Bradbury eds), pp. 565 – 689 , Allen Dolan , J.R., S all , N. , Metcalfe , A. & Gasser , B. ( 2003 ) Effects of
Press Inc. , Lawrence, Kansas . turbulence on the feeding and growth of a marine oligot-
Dogopolskaya , M.A. ( 1940 ) Zooplankton of the Black Sea rich ciliate . A quatic Microbial Ecology , 31 , 183 – 192 .
near Karadag . T ransactions of the Karadag Biological Station , * Dolan , J.R. , Jacquet , S. & Torreton , J. - P. ( 2006 ) Comparing
1940 , 57 – 110 . taxonomic and morphological biodiversity of tintinnids
Doherty , M. , Tamura , M. , Vriezen , J.A.C. , McManus , G.B. & (planktonic ciliates) of New Caledonia. Limnology and Ocea-
Katz , L.A. ( 2010 ) Diveristy of Oligotrichia and Choreot- nography , 51 , 950 – 958 .
richia ciliates in coastal marine sediments and in overlying * Dolan , J.R. , Lem é e , R. , Gasparini , S. , Mousseau , L. & Heyn-
plankton . A pplied and Environmental Microbiology , 7 6 , drickx , C. ( 2006 ) Probing diversity in the plankton: using
3924 – 3935 . patterns in Tintinnids (planktonic marine ciliates) to iden-
* Dohi , K. ( 1982 ) Seasonal changes of tintinnid community tify mechanisms . H ydrobiologia , 555 , 143 – 157 .
in Funka Bay . Bulletin of the Plankton Society of Japan , 29 , * Dolan , J.R. , Ritchie , M.R. & Ras , J. ( 2007 ) The neutral com-
77 – 87 . munity structure of planktonic herbivores, tintinnid cili-
Dolan , J.R. ( 1991 ) Microphagous ciliates in mesohaline Ches- ates of the microzooplankton, across the SE Pacifi c Ocean .
apeake Bay waters – estimates of growth rates and con- Biogeosciences , 4 , 397 – 410 .
sumption by copepods . M arine Biology , 111 , 303 – 309 . * Dolan , J.R. , Ritchie , M.E. , Tunin - Ley , A. & Pizay , M. - D. ( 2009 )
Dolan , J.R. ( 1997 ) Phosphorus and ammonia excretion by Dynamics of core and occasional species in the marine
planktonic protists. M arine Geology , 139 , 109 – 122 . plankton: tintinnid ciliates in the north - west Mediterra-
* Dolan , J.R. ( 2005 ) Introduction to the biogeography of nean Sea . J ournal of Biogeography , 36 , 887 – 895 .
aquatic microbes . A quatic Microbial Ecology , 41 , 39 – 48 . Dolven , J.K. , Lindqvist , C. , Albert , V.A. , Bj ø rklund , K.R. ,
Dolan , J.R. ( 2010 ) Morphology and ecology in tintinnid cili- Yuasa , T. , Takahashi , O. & Mayama , S. ( 2007 ) Molecular
ates of the marine plankton: correlates of lorica dimen- diversity of alveolates associated with neritic North Atlan-
sions . A cta Protozoologica , 49 , 235 – 344 . tic radiolarians . Protist , 158 , 65 – 76 .

References 255
Dong , X. , Knoll , A.H. & Lipps , J.H. ( 1997 ) Late Cambrian Dur á n , M. ( 1965 ) Tintinnoineos de las costas de Mauritania
Radiolaria from Hunan, China . J ournal of Paleontology , 71 , y Senegal . Trabajos del Instituto Espa ñ ol de Oceanografi a , 32 ,
753 – 758 . 1 – 32 + Plates 1 – 11.
* Dorgham , M.M. , El - Ghobashy , E.A. & El - Tohamy , S.W. ( 2009 ) Durmus , T. , Balci , M. & Balkis , N. ( 2011 ) Species of genus
Preliminary study on protozoan community in Damietta Tintinnopsis Stein 1867 in Turkish coastal wates and
Harbor, Egypt . Global Veterinaria , 3 , 495 – 502 . new record of Tintinnopsis corniger Hada, 1964. Pakistan
Dornbos , S.Q. , Bottjer , D.J. , Chen , J. - Y. , Oliveri , P. , Gao , F. & Li , Journal of Zoology , 44 , 383 – 388 .
C. - W. ( 2005 ) Precambrian animal life: Taphonomy of Dussart , B.H. ( 1965 ). Les diff é rentes cat é gories de plancton .
phosphatized metazoan embryos from southwest China . Hydrobiologia 26 , 72 – 74 .
Lethaia , 38 , 101 – 109 . Echols , R.J. & Fowler , G.A. ( 1973 ) Agglutinated tintinnid
Douzery , E.J.P. , Snell , E.A. , Bapteste , E. , Delsuc , F. & Philippe , loricae from some Recent and Late Pleistocene shelf sedi-
H. ( 2004 ) The timing of eukaryotic evolution: does a ments . Micropaleontology , 19 , 431 – 443 .
relaxed molecular clock reconcile proteins and fossils? P ro- Edgcomb , V. , Orsi , W. , Bunge , J. , Jeon , S. , Christen , R. , Leslin ,
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United C. , Holder , M. , Taylor , G.T. , Suarez , P. Varela , R. & Epstein ,
States of America , 101 , 15386 – 15391 . S. ( 2011 ) Protistan microbial observatory in the Cariaco
Duboscq , O. & Collin , B. ( 1910 ) Sur la reproduction sexu é e Basin, Caribbean. 1. Pyrosequencing vs Sanger insights
d ’ un protiste parasite des tintinnides . C omptes Rendus de into species richness. I SME , 5 , 1344 – 1356 .
l ’ Acad é mie des Sciences de Paris , 51 , 340 – 341 . Ehrenberg , C.G. ( 1832 ) Uber die Entwicklung und Lebens-
* Duff , R.J. , Ball , H. & Lavrentyev , P.J. ( 2008 ) Application of dauer der Infusionsthiere, nebst ferneren Beitragen zueiner
combined morphological– molecular approaches to the Vergleichung ihrer organischen Systeme . K ö nigliche Akade-
identifi cation of planktonic protists from environmental mie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin Physikalische Abhandlungen ,
samples . J ournal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 55 , 306 – 1831 , 1 – 154 .
312 . Ehrenberg , C.G. ( 1841 ) Ü ber die Entwickelung und Leb-
Dujardin , F. ( 1841 ) Histoire Naturelle des Zoophytes. Infusoires, ensdauer der Infusionthiere; nebst ferneren Beitr â gen
comprenant la Physiolgie et la Classifi cation de ces Animaux et zu einer Vergleichung ibrer organischen Systeme.
La Maniere des les Etudier à l ’ Aide du Microscope . Librarie Physikalische Abhandlungen der K ö niglichen Akademie
Encyclop é dique de Roret , Paris . der Wissenschaften zu Berlin. A us dem Jahre 1831 ,
Duka , L.A. & Gordina , A.D. ( 1973 ) Abundance of ichthyo- 1 – 154 .
plankton and feeding of fi sh larvae in the western Medi- Eicher , D.L. ( 1965 ) Cretaceous tintinnids from the western
terranean and adjacent areas of the Atlantic Ocean . interior of the United States : M icropaleontology 11 , 449 –
Hydrobiological Journal , 9 , 54 – 59 . 456 .
Dunthorn , M. & Katz , L.A. ( 2008 ) Richness of morphological * Elliott , D.T. & Kauffmann , R.S. ( 2007 ) Spatial and temporal
hypotheses in ciliate systematics allows for detailed assess- variability of mesozooplankton and tintinnid Ciliates in
ment of homology and comparisons with gene trees . a seasonally hypersaline estuary . E stuaries and Coasts , 3 0 ,
Denisia , 23 , 389 – 394 . 418 – 430 .
Dunthorn , M. , Lipps , J.H. & Stoeck , T. ( 2010 ) Reassessment Elton , C.S. ( 1927 ) Animal Ecology . University of Chicago
of putative ciliate fossils Eotintinnopsis, Wujiangella, Press , Chicago .
and Yonyangella from the Neoproterozoic Doushantuo Emlet , R.B. & Strathmann , R.R. ( 1985 ) Gravity, drag and
Formation in China . A cta Protozoologica , 4 9 , 139 – feeding currents of small zooplankton . S cience , 228 ,
144 . 1016 – 1017 .
* Dupuy , C. , Vaquer , A. , Lam - Hoai , T. , Rougier , C. , Mazouni , Endo , T. & Nagata , H. ( 1984 ) Resting and germination of cysts
N. , Lautier , J. , Collos , Y. & Le Gall , S. ( 2000 ) Feeding rate of of Peridinium sp. (Dinophyceae) . B ulletin of the Plankton
the oyster Crassostrea gigas in a natural planktonic com- Society of Japan , 31 , 23 – 33 .
munity of the Mediterranean Thau Lagoon . M arine Ecology Endo , Y. ( 2005 ) Method of Chloroplast Sequestration and
Progress Series , 205 , 171 – 184 . Induction of Encystment in the Planktonic Ciliate S trom-
Dur á n , M. ( 1951 ) Contribuci ó n al estudio de los tint í nidos del bidium conicum . Ph.D. Thesis, Tohoku University, Sendai,
plancton de las costas de Castell ó n (Mediterr á neo occiden- 56pp.
tal) . Publicaciones del Instituto de Biolog í a Aplicada (Barce- Endo , Y. & Taniguchi , A. ( 2006 ) Conjugation and encystment
lona) , 5 , 101 – 122 . of the planktonic choreotrich ciliate S trombidium conicum .
Dur á n , M. ( 1953 ) Contribuci ó n al estudio de los tint í nidos del Japanese Journal of Protozoology , 39 , 98 – 99 .
plancton de las costas de Castell ó n (Mediterr á neo occiden- Entz , G. , Sr ( 1884 ) Ü ber Infusorien des Golfes von Neapel .
tal). Nota II . P ublicaciones del Instituto de Biolog í a Aplicada Mittheilungen aus der Zoologischen Station zu Neapel , 5 ,
(Barcelona) , 12 , 79 – 95 . 289 – 444 + Plates 20 – 25 .
* Dur á n , M. ( 1957 ) Nota sobre algunos tintinnoineos del Entz , G. , Sr ( 1885 ) Zur n ä heren Kenntnis der Tintinnoden .
plancton de Puerto Rico . Investigacion Pesquera, Barcelona , Mittheilungen aus der Zoologischen Station zu Neapel , 6 , 185 –
8 , 97 – 120 . 216 + Plates 13, 14.

256 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Entz , G. , Jr ( 1909a ) Die S ü sswasser - Tintinniden . M athema- Fenchel , T. ( 1982a ) Ecology of heterotrophic microfl agellates
tische und naturwissenschaftliche Berichte aus Ungarn , 2 5 , 1. Some important forms and their functional ecology .
197 – 225 . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 8 , 211 – 223 .
Entz , G. , J r ( 1909b ) Studien ü ber Organisation und Biologie Fenchel , T. ( 1982b ) Ecology of heterotrophic microfl agellates
der Tintinniden . A rchiv f ü r Protistenkunde , 1 5 , 93 – 226 + II . B ioenergetics and growth Marine Ecology Progress Series ,
Plates 8 – 21 . 8 , 225 – 231 .
Entz , G. , Jr ( 1937 ) Fibrillen in “ Favella Ehrenbergii ” J ö rgensen Fenchel , T. ( 1982c ) Ecology of heterotrophic microfl agellates
( “ Ciliata, Oligotricha ” ). International Congress of Zoology III: Adaptations to heterogenous environments . Marine
1937, Lisboa, 1446– 1448. Ecology Progress Series , 9 , 25 – 33 .
Erickson , J.S. , Hashemi , N. , Sullivan , J.M. , Weidemann , A.D. Fenchel , T. ( 1982d ) Ecology of heterotrophic microfl agellates
& Ligler , F.S. ( 2011 ) In situ phytoplankton analysis: there ’ s IV. Quantitative occurrence and importance as bacterial
plenty of room at the bottom . A nalytical Chemistry , DOI: consumers . M arine Ecology Progress Series , 9 , 35 – 43 .
10.1021/ac201623k. Fenchel , T. ( 1986 ) Protozoan fi lter feeding . P rogress in Protis-
* Eskinazi - Sant ’ anna , E.M. & Bj ö rnberg , T.K.S. ( 2006 ) Sea- tology , 1 , 65 – 113 .
sonal dynamics of microzooplankton in the Sã o Sebasti ão Fenchel , T. ( 1987 ) Ecology of Protozoa: the Biology of Free - liv-
Channel (SP, Brazil) . B razilian Journal of Biology , 66 , 221 – ing Phagotrophic Protists . (ed. T.D. Brock ). Brock/Springer
231 . Series in Contemporary Bioscience , Berlin .
Faur é - Fremiet , E. ( 1908 ) Le Tintinnidium inquilinum . Archiv Fenchel , T. ( 1988 ) Marine plankton food chains . A nnual
f ü r Protistenkunde , 11 , 225 – 251 + Plate 12. Review of Ecology and Systematics , 19 , 19 – 38 .
Faur é - Fremiet , E. ( 1912 ) Sur le mode de division du Strombid- Fenchel , T. & Blackburn , N. ( 1999 ) Motile chemosensory
ium sulcatum Cl. et Lach . Bulletin de la Soci é t é Zoologique de behaviour of phagotrophic protists: mechanisms for and
France , 36 (year 1911), 207 – 208 . effi ciency in congregating at food patches . P rotist , 150 ,
Faur é - Fremiet , E. ( 1924 ) Contribution a la connaissance des 325 – 336 .
infusoires planktoniques . B ulletin Biologique de France et de Fenchel , T. & Findlay , B.J. ( 2004 ) The ubiquity of small species:
Belgique , Suppl. 6 , 1 – 171 . patterns of local and global diversity . Bioscience , 54 ,
Faur é - Fremiet , E. ( 1948 ) Le rythme de mar é e du S trombidium 777 – 784 .
oculatum Gruber . B ulletin Biologique de France et de Belgique , Fenchel , T. & Findlay , B.J. ( 1983 ) Respiration rates in hetero-
82 , 3 – 23 . trophic, free - living Protozoa . M icrobial Ecololgy , 9 , 99 – 122 .
Faur é - Fremiet , E. ( 1953 ) La bipartition é nantiotrope chez les Fenchel , T. & Jonsson , P.R. ( 1988 ) The functional biology of
cili é s oligotriches . Archives d ’ Anatomie microscopique et de Strombidium sulcatum , a marine oligotrich ciliate (Cilo-
Morphologie Exp é rimentale , 42 , 209 – 225 . phora, Oligotrichina) . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 4 8 ,
Faur é - Fremiet , E. ( 1970 ) Remarques sur la syst é matique des 1 – 15 .
cili é s Oligotrichida . P rotistologica , 5 (year 1969), 345 – 352 . Fensome , R.A. , Taylor , F.J.R. , Norris , G. , Sargeant , W.A.S. ,
Faur é - Fremiet , E. & Ganier , M. - Cl. ( 1970 ) Structure fi ne du Wharton , D.I. & William , G.L. ( 1993 ) A Classifi cation of
Strombidium sulcatum Cl. et L. (Ciliata Oligotrichida) . P rotis- Living and Fossil Dinofl agellates . Micropaleontology , Special
tologica 6 , 207 – 223 . Publication no. 7. Sheridan Press , Hanover, Pennsylvania .
Felsenstein , J. ( 2004 ) I nferring Phylogenies . Sinauer Associ- Fenton , A. , Spencer , M. & Montagnes , D.J.S. ( 2010 ) Parame-
ates , Sunderland, Massachusetts . terising variable assimilation effi ciency in predator prey
Fenchel , T. ( 1969 ) The ecology of marine microbenthos: 4. models . Oikos , 119 , 1000 – 1010 .
Structure and function of the benthic ecosystem, its chemi- * Fernandes , L.F. ( 1999 ) Tintinnids (Ciliophora – Suborder Tin-
cal and physical factors and the microfauna communities tinnina) from subantarctic and antarctic waters between
with special reference to the ciliated Protoza. Ophelia , 6 , Argentine and Antarctic Peninsula (35 ° 8 – 62 ° 8) (Novem-
1 – 182 . ber/1992) . B razilian Journal of Oceanography , 47 , 155 – 171 .
Fenchel , T. ( 1980a ) Suspension feeding ciliated protozoa: * Fernandes , L.F. ( 2004a ) Tintininos (Ciliophora, Tintinnina)
structure and function of feeding organelles . A rchive f ü r de á guas subtropicais na regi ã o Sueste - Sul do Brasil. I.
Protistenkunde , 123 , 239 – 260 . Fam í lias Codonellidae, Codonellopsidae, Coxliellidae, Cyt-
Fenchel , T. ( 1980b ) Suspension feeding ciliated protozoa: tarocylidae, Epiplocylidae, Petalotrichidae, Ptychocylidae,
functional response and particle selection. Microbial Tintinnididae e Undellidae . Revista Brasiliera de Zoologia ,
Ecology , 6 , 1 – 11 . 21 , 551 – 576 .
Fenchel , T . ( 1980c ) Suspension feeding ciliated protozoa: * Fernandes , L.F. ( 2004b ) Tintinnids (Ciliophora, Tintinnina)
feeding rates and thier ecological signifi cance . Microbial from subtropical waters of the Southern Brazil. II. Families
Ecology 6 , 13 – 25 . Dictyocystidae, Rhabdonellidae, Tintinnidae and Xystonel-
Fenchel , T. ( 1980d ) Suspension feeding ciliated protozoa: rela- lidae . Revista Brasiliera de Zoologia , 21 , 605 – 628 .
tion between particle size and clearance in suspension Fernandez - Leborans , G. ( 1983 ) Nouvelles observations sur les
feeding ciliates . L imnology and Oceanography , 25 , 733 – 738 . deux cili é s Oligotriches: H alteria grandinella (la morphologie

References 257
et la morphogen è se) et S trombilidium gyrans (la morpholo- onas gonderi nov. spec. (Zoomastigophora, Spiromonadidae)
gie) . A cta Protozoologica , 22 , 251 – 256 + Plates 1 – 3 . invading the pelicle of ciliates of the genus C olpoda (Cilio-
Fessenden , L. & Cowles , T.J. ( 1994 ) Copepod predation on phora, Colpodidae). Protistologica , 20 , 635 – 648 .
phagotrophic ciliates in Oregon coastal waters . M arine Foissner , W. & Foissner , I. ( 1995 ) C iliasporidium platyphyryae
Ecology Progress Series , 107 , 103 – 111 . nov. gen., nov. spec. (Microspora incerta sedis), a parasite
Fields , B.S. , Shotts , E.B. Jr , Feeley , J.C. , Gorman , G.W. & Martin , of Platyophrya terricola (Ciliophora, Colpodea) . European
T.M. ( 1984 ) Proliferation of Legionella pneumophila as an Journal of Protistology , 31 , 248 – 259 .
intracellular parasite of the ciliated protozoa T etrahymena Foissner , W. & O ’ Donoghue , P.J. ( 1990 ) Morphology and infra-
pyriformes . Applied and Environmental Microbiology , 47 , ciliature of some freshwater ciliates (Protozoa: Ciliophora)
467 – 471 . from Western and South Australia . I nvertebrate Taxonomy ,
Figueiredo , G.M. , Montagnes , D.J.S. & Nash , R.D.M. ( 2005 ) 3 , 661 – 696 .
The role of the generally unrecognised microprey source as Foissner , W. & Wilbert , N. ( 1979 ) Morphologie, Infraciliatur
food for larval fi sh in the Irish Sea. Marine Biology , 148 , und Ö kologie der limnischen Tintinnina: T intinnidium fl u-
395 – 404 . viatile Stein, Tintinnidium pusillum Entz, Tintinnopsis cylin-
Figueiredo , G.M. , Nash , R.D.M. & Montagnes , D.J.S. ( 2007 ) drata Daday und C odonella cratera (Leidy) (Ciliophora,
Do protozoa contribute signifi cantly to the diet of larval fi sh Polyhymenophora) . Journal of Protozoology , 26 , 90 – 103 .
in the Irish Sea? Journal of the Marine Biological Association Foissner , W. , Blatterer , H. , Berger , H. & Kohmann , F. ( 1991 )
of the United Kingdom , 87 , 843 – 850 . Taxonomische und ö kologische Revision der Ciliaten des
Figueiredo , G.M. , Montagnes , D.J.S. & Nash , R.D.M. ( 2009 ) Saprobiensystems – Band I: Cyrtophorida, Oligotrichida,
The importance of protozooplankton as prey for copepods Hypotrichia, Colpodea . I nformationsberichte des Bayerischen
in the coastal areas of the central Irish Sea . H ydrobiologia , Landesamtes f ü r Wasserwirtschaft , 1/91 , 1 – 478 .
628 , 227 – 239 . Foissner , W. , Berger , H. & Schaumburg , J. ( 1999 )
Fileman , E.S. & Leakey , R.J.G. ( 2005 ) Microzooplankton Identifi cation and Ecology of Limnetic Plankton Ciliates .
dynamics during the development of the spring bloom Informationsberichte des Bayerischen Landesamtes f ü r Wasser-
in the north - east Atlantic . J ournal of the Marine Biological wirtschaft , 3/99 , 1 – 793 .
Association of the United Kingdom , 85 , 741 – 753 . Foissner , W. , Moon - van der Staay , S.Y. , van der Staay , G.W.M.
Fileman , E.S. , Cummings , D.G. & Llewellyn , C.A. ( 2002 ) et al. ( 2004 ) Reconciling classical and molecular phyloge-
Microplankton community structure and the impact of nies in the stichotrichines (Ciliophora, Spirotrichea),
microoplankton grazing during E miliania huxleyi bloom, including new sequences from some rare species . E uropean
off the Devon coast . Journal of the Marine Biological Associa- Journal of Protistology , 40 , 265 – 281 .
tion of the United Kingdom , 82 , 359 – 368 . Foissner , W. , M ü ller , H. & Weisse , T. ( 2005 ) The unusual,
Fileman , E.S. , Petropavlovsky , A. & Harris , R.P. ( 2010 ) Grazing lepidosome - coated resting cyst of M eseres corlissi (Cilio-
by the copepods C alanus helgolandicus and Acartia clausi on phora: Oligotrichea): light and scanning electron micros-
the protozooplankton community at station L4 in the copy, cytochemistry . A cta Protozoologica , 44 , 201 – 215 .
Western English Channel . J ournal of Plankton Research , 32 , Foissner , W. , Pichler , M. , Al - Rasheid , K.A.A. S. & Weisse , T.
709 – 724 . ( 2006 ) The unusual, lepidosome - coated resting cyst of
Finlay , K. & Roff , J.C. ( 2004 ) Radiotracer determination of Meseres corlissi (Ciliophora:Oligotrichea): Encystment and
the diet of calanoid copepod nauplii and copepodites in genesis and release of the lepidosomes . A cta Protozoologica ,
a temperate estuary . I CES Journal of Marine Science , 61 , 45 , 323 – 338 .
552 . Foissner , W. , M ü ller , H. & Agatha , S. ( 2007 ) A comparative
Foissner , I. & Foissner , W. ( 1986 ) Ciliomyces spectabilis , nov. fi ne structural and phylogenetic analysis of resting cysts
Gen., nov. Spec., a zoosporic fungus which parasitizes cysts in oligotrich and hypotrich Spirotrichea (Ciliophora) . E uro-
of the ciliate Kahliella simplex . Z eitschrift f ü r Parasitenkunde , pean Journal of Protistology , 4 3 , 295 – 314 .
72 , 29 – 41 . Foissner , W. , Chao , A. & Katz , L.A. ( 2009 ) Diversity and geo-
Foissner , W. ( 1996 ) Ontogenesis in ciliated protozoa, with graphic distribution of ciliates (Protista: Ciliophora) . B iodi-
emphasis on stomatogenesis. In Ciliates: Cells as Organisms versity and Conservation , 8 , 111 – 129 .
( K. Hausmann & P.C. Bradbury eds), pp. 95 – 177 , G. Fischer , Foissner , W. , Stoeck , T. , Agatha , S. & Dunthorn , M. ( 2011 )
Stuttgart . Intraclass evolution and classifi cation of the Colpodea (Cilio-
Foissner , W . ( 2005 ) The unusual, lepidosome - coated resting phora ). Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 58 , 397 – 415 .
cyst of M eseres corlissi (Ciliophora: Oligotrichea): transmis- Fokin , S.I. , Schweikert , M. , G ö rtz , H. - D. & Fujishima , M.
sion electron microscopy and phylogeny . Acta Protozoolog- ( 2003 ) Bacterial endocytobionts of Ciliophora. Diversity
ica , 44 , 217 – 230 . and some interactions with the host . E uropean Journal of
Foissner , W. & Foissner , I. ( 1984 ) First record of an ectopara- Protistology , 39 , 475 – 480 .
sitic fl agellate on ciliates: An ultrastructural investigation Fokin , S.I. , Di Giuseppe , G. , Erra , F. & Dini , F. ( 2008 ) E uplote-
of the morphology and the mode of attachment of S pirom- spora binucleata n. gen., n. sp (Protozoa: Microsporidia),

258 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
a parasite infecting the hypotrichous ciliate E uplotes wood- Froneman , P.W. & McQuaid , C.D. ( 1997 ) Preliminary Investi-
ruffi , with observations on microsporidian infections in Cili- gation of the Ecological Role of Microzooplankton in the
ophora . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 55 , 214 – 228 . Kariega Estuary, South Africa . E stuarine , Coastal and Shelf
Fol , H. ( 1881 ) Contribution à la connaissance de la famille des Science , 45 , 689 – 695 .
Tintinnodea . A rchives des Sciences Physiques et Naturelles , 5 , Froneman , P.W. & Perissinotto , R. ( 1996a ) Microzooplankton
5 – 24 + Plate 1. grazing and protozooplankton community structure in the
Fol , H. ( 1883 ) Nouvelle contribution à la connaissance de la South Atlantic and in the Atlantic sector of the Southern
famille des Tintinnodea . Archives des Sciences Physiques et Ocean . Deep - Sea Research I , 43 , 703 – 721 .
Naturelles , 9 , 554 – 578 + Plate 18. Froneman , P.W. & Perissinotto , R. ( 1996b ) Structure and
Fol , H. ( 1884 ) Sur la famille des Tintinnodea . Recueil grazing of the microzooplankton communities of the Sub-
Zoologique Suisse 1 , 27 – 64 . tropical Convergence and a warm - core eddy in the Atlantic
* Fonda Umani , S. , Honsell , G. , Cabrini , M. & Milani , L. ( 1985 ) sector of the Southern Ocean . M arine Ecology Progress
A tintinnid bloom in the Gulf of Trieste (Northern Adriatic Series , 135 , 237 – 245 .
Sea) . Oebalia , 11 , 149 – 156 . Froneman , P.W. , Pakhomov , E.A. & Meaton , V. ( 1998 ) Obser-
* Fonda Umani , S. , Beran , A. , Parlato , S. , Virgilio , D. , Zollet , T. , vations on the association between the diatom, Fragilari-
Olazabal , A.D. , Lazzarini , B. & Cabrini , M. ( 2004 ) Noctiluca opsis doliolus Wallich, and the tintinnid, S alpingella
scintillans MaCartney in the Northern Adriatic Sea: long - subconica Kofoid . S outh African Journal of Science , 94 ,
term dynamics, relationships with temperature and 202 – 202 .
eutrophication, and role in the food web . J ournal of Plankton Fuhrman , J.A. & Azam , F. ( 1980 ) Bacterioplankton secondary
Research , 26 , 545 – 561 . production estimates for coastal waters of British Colum-
* Fonda Umani , S. , Monti , M. , Cataletto , B. & Budillon , G. bia, Antarctica, and California . Applied and Environmental
( 2011 ) Tintinnid distributions in the Strait of Magellan Microbiology , 39 , 1085 – 1095 .
(Chile) . P olar Biology , 34 , 1285 – 1299 . Fuhrman , J.A. , Steele , J.A. , Hewson , I. , Schwalbach , M.S. ,
Fontaneto , D. & Brodie , J. ( 2011 ) Why biogeography of micro- Brown , M.V. , Green , J.L. & Brown , J.H. ( 2008 ) A latitudinal
organisms? In Biogeography of Microscopic Organisms: Is gradient in planktonic marine bacteria . P roceedings of the
Everything Small Everywhere? ( Fontaneto , D. ed.), pp. 3 – 10 . National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America ,
Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 105 , 7774 – 7778 .
* Fornshell , J.A. ( 1979 ) Microplankton patchiness in the Fukami , K. , Watanabe , A. , Fujita , S. , Yamaoka , K. & Nishi-
northwest Atlantic Ocean . Journal of Protozoology , 26 , jima , T. ( 1999 ) Predation on naked protozoan microzoo-
270 – 272 . plankton by fi sh larvae . Marine Ecology Progress Series ,
Fortier , L. & Harris , R.P. ( 1989 ) Optimal foraging and density 185 , 285 – 291 .
dependent competition in marine fi sh larvae. Marine Fukuyo , Y. , Takano , H. , Chihara , M. , Matsuoka , K. ( 1990 ) R ed
Ecology Progress Series , 51 , 19 – 33 . Tide Organisms in Japan, An Illustrated Taxonomic Guide .
Fossum , P. & Ellertsen , B. ( 1994 ) Gut content analysis of fi rst - Uchida Rokakuho , Tokyo .
feeding cod larvae (G adus morhua L. ) sampled at Lofoten, Fulco , V.K. ( 2007 ) Harmful effects of the toxic dinofl agel-
Norway, 1979 – 1986 . ICES Marine Science Symposium , late Alexandrium tamarense on the tintinnids F avella
198 , 430 – 437 . taraikaensis and E utintinnus sp . J ournal of the Marine
Foster , R.A. , Carpenter , E.J. & Bergman , B. ( 2006 ) Unicellular Biological Association of the United Kingdom , 87 , 1085 –
cyanobionts in open ocean dinofl agellates, radiolarians, 1088 .
and tintinnids: ultrastructural characterization and immu- Futuyma , D.J. ( 2009 ) E volution , 2n d edn . Sinauer Associates
nolocalization of phycoerythrin and nitrogenase . J ournal of Inc. , Sunderland, Massachusetts .
Phycology , 42 , 453 – 463 . * Gaarder , K.R. ( 1946 ) Tintinnoinea from the “ Michael Sars ”
Fox , J.W. , Nelson , W.A. & McCauley , E. ( 2010 ). Coexistence North Atlantic deep sea expedition 1910 . Reports of the
and the paradox of the plankton: quantifying selection Scientifi c Research of the “ Michael Sars ” North Atlantic Deep
from noisy data . E cology , 91 , 1774 – 1786 . Sea Expedition 2 , 1 – 37 .
Fredrickson , K.A. & Strom , S.L. ( 2009 ) The algal osmolyte Gadomski , D.M. & Boehlert , G.W. ( 1984 ) Feeding ecology of
DMSP as a microzooplankton grazing deterrent in labora- pelagic larvae of English sole P arophrys vetulus and butter
tory and fi eld studies . J ournal of Plankton Research , 3 1 , soleIsopsetta isolepis off the Oregon coast . M arine Ecology
135 – 152 . Progress Series , 20 , 1 – 12 .
Frias - Lopez , J. , Thompson , A. , Waldbauer , J. & Chisholm , S.W. Gaines , G. & Elbr ä chter , M. ( 1987 ) Heterotrophic nutrition .
( 2009 ) Use of stable isotope - labelled cells to identify active InThe Biology of Dinofl agellates ( F.J.R. Taylor ed.), pp. 224 –
grazers of picocyanobacteria in ocean surface waters . E nvi- 268 , Blackwell Scientifi c Publishers , Oxford .
ronmental Microbiology , 11 , 512 – 525 . Gallegos , C.L. ( 1989 ) Microzooplankton grazing on
Froneman , P.W. ( 2002 ) Trophic cascading in an oligo- phytoplankton in the Rhode River, Maryland: Nonlinear
trophic temperate estuary, South Africa . J ournal of Plankton feeding kinetics . M arine Ecology Progress Series , 57 ,
Research , 24 , 807 – 816 . 23 – 33 .

References 259
Gao , S. , Gong , J. , Lynn , D. , Lin , X. & Song , W. ( 2009 ) An Kingston Harbour, Jamaica . Estuarine , Coastal and Shelf
updated phylogeny of oligotrich and choreotrich ciliates Science , 29 , 1 – 10 .
(Protozoa, Ciliophora, Spirotrichea) with representative * Gilron , G.L. , Lynn , D.H. & Smith , I.P. ( 1990 ) Taxonomic key
taxa collected from Chinese coastal waters . Systematics and and illustrated guide to the tintinnine ciliates of the Cays -
Biodiversity , 7 , 235 – 342 . Hellshire Region near Kingston Harbour, Jamaica . C arib-
* Gast , V. ( 1985 ) Bacteria as a food source for microzoo- bean Journal of Science , 26 , 152 – 162 .
plankton in the Schlei Fjord and Baltic Sea with special Gilron , G.L. , Lynn , D.H. & Roff , J.C. ( 1991 ) The annual cycle
reference to ciliates . M arine Ecology Progress Series , 22 , of biomass and production of tintinnine ciliates in a tropi-
107 – 120 . cal neritic region near Kingston, Jamaica . Marine Microbial
Gaston , KJ. & He , F. ( 2011 ) Species occurrence and occu- Food Webs , 5 , 95 – 113 .
pancy . In Biological Diversity: frontiers in measurement and Gismervik , I. ( 2005 ) Numerical and functional responses of
assessment ( Magurran , A.E. & McGill , B.J. eds), pp. 141 – choreo and oligotrich planktonic ciliates . Aquatic Microbial
151 , Oxford , Oxford University Press . Ecology , 40 , 163 – 173 .
Gavrilova , N.A. ( 2010 ) Microzooplankton . In T he Introducers Glazier , D.S. ( 2006 ) The 3/4 - power law Is not universal: evo-
in the Biodiversity and Productivity of the Sea Azov and the lution of isometric, ontogenetic metabolic scaling inpelagic
Black Sea ( Matishov , G.G. , Boltachyov , A.R. , eds), Rostov - on - animals . BioScience , 56 , 325 – 332 .
Don , pp. 63 – 39 . SSC Ras Publishing . Glibert , P.M. ( 1982 ) Regional studies of daily, seasonal and
Gavrilova , N. & Dolan , J.R. ( 2007 ) A note on species lists size fraction variability in ammonium remineralization .
and ecosystem shifts: Black Sea tintinnids, ciliates of Marine Biology , 70 , 209 – 222 .
the microzooplankton . Acta Protozoologica , 46 , 279 – * Godhantaraman , N. & Uye , S. ( 2003 ) Geographical and sea-
288 . sonal variations in taxonomic composition, abundance and
Gerritsen , J. & Strickler , J.R. ( 1977 ) Encounter probabilities biomass of microzooplankton across a brackish - water
and community structure in zooplankton: a mathematical lagoonal system of Japan . J ournal of Plankton Research , 25 ,
model . Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada , 3 4 , 465 – 482 .
73 – 82 . * Godhantaraman , N. ( 1994 ) Species composition and abun-
Gifford , D.J. ( 1985 ) Laboratory culture of marine plank- dance of tintinnids and copepods in the Pichavaram
tonic oligotrichs (Ciliophora, Oligotrichida) . M arine Ecology mangroves (South India) . C iencias Marinas , 20 , 371 –
Progress Series , 23 , 257 – 267 . 391 .
Gifford , D.J. ( 1991 ) The protozoan – metazoan trophic link Godhantaraman , N. ( 2001 ) Seasonal variations in taxonomic
in pelagic ecosystems . J ournal of Protozoology , 38 , 81 – composition, abundance and food web relationship of
86 . microzooplankton in estuarine and mangrove waters,
Gifford , D.J. & Dagg , M.J. ( 1988 ) Feeding of the estuarine Parangipettai region, southeast coast of India . I ndian
copepod Acartia tonsa Dana: Carnivory vs. herbivory in Journal of Marine Sciences , 30 , 151 – 160 .
natural microplankton assemblages . Bulletin of Marine Godhantaraman , N. ( 2002 ) Seasonal variations in species
Science , 43 , 458 – 468 . comosition, abundance, biomass and estimated production
Gifford , D.J. & Dagg , M.J. ( 1991 ) The microzooplankton – mes- rates of tintinnids at tropical estuarine and mangrove
ozooplankton link: consumption of planktonic protozoa by waters, Parangipettai, southeast coast of India . J ournal of
the calanoid copepodsAcartia tonsa Dana and N eocalanus Marine Systems , 36 , 161 – 171 .
plumchrus Murukawa . Marine Microbial Food Webs , 5 , Godhantaraman , N. & Uye , S. ( 2001 ) Geographical variations
161 – 177 . in abundance, biomass and trophodynamic role of micro-
Gilbert , J.J. ( 1994 ) Jumping behavior in the oligotrich ciliates zooplankton across an inshore - offshore gradient in the
Strobilidium velox and Halteria grandinella , and its signifi - Inland Sea of Japan and adjacent Pacifi c Ocean . P lankton
cance as a defense against rotifer predators . M icrobial Biology and Ecology , 48 , 19 – 27 .
Ecology , 27 , 189 – 200 . Goetz , E. & Ohman , M.D. ( 2010 ) Integrated molecular and
Gillies , C. & Hanson , E.D. ( 1963 ) A new species of L eptomonas morphological biogeography of the calanoid family Eucala-
parasitizing the macronucleus of P aramecium trichium . nidae . Deep - Sea Research II , 57 , 2110 – 2129 .
Journal of Protozoology , 10 , 467 – 473 . Gold , K. ( 1968 ) Some observations on the biology of T intin-
Gilmer , R.W. & Harbison , G.R. ( 1991 ) Diet of L imacina nopsis sp . J ournal of Protozoology , 15 , 193 – 194 .
helicina (Gastropoda: Thecosomata) in Arctic waters in Gold , K. ( 1969a ) The preservation of tintinnids . J ournal of
midsummer . M arine Ecology Progress Series , 77 , 125 – Protozoology , 16 , 126 – 128 .
134 . Gold , K. ( 1969b ) Tintinnids: feeding experiments and
* Gilron , G.L. & Lynn , D.H. ( 1989a ) Assuming a 50% cell occu- lorica development . J ournal of Protozoology , 16 , 507 –
pancy of the lorica overestimates tintinnine ciliate biomass . 509 .
Marine Biology , 103 , 413 – 416 . Gold , K. ( 1970 ) Cultivation of marine ciliates (Tintinida)
* Gilron , G.L. & Lynn , D.H. ( 1989b ) Estimates of in situ popula- and heterotrophic fl agellates . Helgolander Wissenschaftliche
tion growth rates of four tintinnine ciliate species near Meeresuntersuchungen , 20 , 264 – 271 .

260 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Gold , K. ( 1971 ) Growth characteristics of the mass - reared Gonz á lez , H.E. , Gonz á lez , S.R. & Brummer , G. - J.A. ( 1994 )
tintinnid Tintionnopsis beroidea . Marine Biology , 8 , 105 – Short - term sedimentation pattern of zooplankton faeces
108 . and microplankton at a permanent station in the Bj ø rna-
Gold , K. ( 1973 ) Methods for growing tintinnids in continous fjorden (Norway) during April – May 1992 . M arine Ecology
culture . A merican Zoologist , 13 , 203 – 208 . Progress Series , 105 , 31 – 45 .
Gold , K. ( 1974 ) Studies on the size distribution of loricae and Gonz á lez , H.E. , Hebbeln , D. , Iriarte , J.L. & Marchant , M.
the growth status of Tintinnida in Eel Pond . B iological Bul- ( 2004 ) Downward fl uxes of faecal material and micro-
letin of the Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole , 1 47 , plankton at 2300 m depth in the oceanic area off Coquimbo
477 . (30 ° S), Chile, during 1993 – 1995 . D eep - Sea Research II , 51 ,
Gold , K. ( 1979 ) Scanning electron microscopy of T intinnopsis 2457 – 2474 .
parva : studies on particle accumulation and the striae. Gorsky , G. , Ohman , M.D. , Picheral , M. , Gasparini , S. , Stem-
Journal of Protozoology , 26 , 415 – 419 . mann , L. , Romagnan , J. - B. , Cawood , A. , Pesant , S.T. ,
Gold , K. ( 1980 ) SEM studies on the lorica of various Tintin- Garcia - Comas , C. & Prejger , F. ( 2010 ) Digital zooplankton
nina . S canning Electron Microscopy , 3 , 537 – 541 . image analysis using the zooscan integrated system . J ournal
Gold , K. & Morales , E.A. ( 1974 ) Effects of temperature on 2 of Plankton Research , 32 , 285 – 303 .
strains of T intinnopsis tubulosa . Journal of Protozoology , 21 , G ö rtz , H.D. ( 1988 ) Endocytobiosis . In P aramecium ( H.D. G ö rtz
442 . ed.), pp. 393 – 405 , Springer , Berlin .
Gold , K. & Morales , E.A. ( 1975a ) Studies on Woods Hole tin- G ö rtz , H.D. & Dieckmann , J. ( 1987 ) L eptomonas ciliatorum n.
tinnids using scanning electron microscopy. Biological Bul- sp. (Kinetoplastida, Trypanosomatidae) in the macronu-
letin , 149 , 427 . cleus of a hypotrichous ciliate . Journal of Protozoology , 34 ,
* Gold , K. & Morales, E.A. (1 975b ) Tintinnida of the New York 259 – 263 .
Bight: Loricae of Parafavella gigantea, P. parundentata, and Govoni , J.J. ( 2010 ) Feeding on protists and particulates by
Ptychocylis obtusa . Transactions of the American Microscopi- the leptocephali of the worm eels Myrophis spp. (Teleostei:
cal Society , 94 , 142 – 145 . Anguilliformes: Ophichthidae), and the potential energy
Gold , K. & Morales , E.A. ( 1975c ) Seasonal changes in lorica contribution of large aloricate protozoa . Scientia Marina ,
sizes and the species of Tintinnida in the New York Bight . 74 , 339 – 344 .
Journal of Protozoology , 22 , 520 – 528 . Govoni , J.J. & Chester , A.J. ( 1990 ) Diet composition of
Gold , K. & Morales , E.A. ( 1976a ) Observations on the nature larval Leiostomus xanthurus in and about the Mississippi
and signifi cance of the particles used by Tintinnida during River plume . J ournal of Plankton Research , 12 , 819 –
lorica - building . T ransactions of the American Microscopical 830 .
Society , 95 , 69 – 72 . Govoni , J.J. , Hoss , D.E. & Chester , A.J. ( 1983 ) Comparative
* Gold , K. & Morales , E.A. ( 1976b ) Studies on the sizes, shapes feeding of three species of larval fi shes in the Northern Gulf
and the development of the lorica of agglutinated Tintin- of Mexico: Brevoortia patronus , L eiostomus xanthurus , and
nida . B iological Bulletin , 150 , 377 – 392 . Micropogonias undulatus . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 1 3 ,
Gold , K. & Morales , E.A. ( 1976c ) Studies on Tintinnida using 189 – 199 .
scanning electron microscopy . Transactions of the American Gowing , M.M. & Bentham , W.N. ( 1994 ) Feeding ecology
Microscopical Society , 95 , 707 – 711 . of phaeodarian radiolarians at the VERTEX North Pacifi c
* Gold , K. & Morales , E.A. ( 1977 ) Studies on the Tintinnida of time series site . J ournal of Plankton Research , 16 , 707 –
Enewetak Atoll . J ournal of Protozoology , 24 , 580 – 587 . 719 .
Gold , K. & Pollingher , U. ( 1971 ) Microgamete formation and Gowing , M.M. & Wishner , K.F. ( 1986 ) Trophic relationships
the growth rate of T intinnopsis beroidea . M arine Biology , 11 , of deep - sea calanoid copepods from the benthic boundary
324 – 329 . layer of the Santa Catalina Basin, California . D eep - Sea
Gomes , E.I. , Gon ç alves , C.P. & Pimenta , C.M.M. ( 2006 ) Os Research A , 33 , 939 – 961 .
Tintinideos. In Dinofl agelados e Tintiniideos da Regiao Central Gowing , M.M. & Wishner , K.F. ( 1992 ) Feeding ecology of
da Zona Economica Exclusiva Brasileira ( D.r. Tenenbaum , benthopelagic zooplankton on an eastern tropical Pacifi c
ed.), pp. 165 – 287 . Museu Nacional : Rio de Janeiro . seamount . Marine Biology , 112 , 451 – 467 .
* Gomez , F. ( 2007 ) On the consortium of the tintinnid E utin- Graham , H.W. & Bronikovsky , N. ( 1944 ) The Genus Ceratium
tinnus and the diatom C haetoceros in the Pacifi c Ocean . in the Pacifi c and North Atlantic Oceans. Carnegie Institute of
Marine Biology , 151 , 1899 – 1906 . Washington, Washington DC, Publication 565.
* Gomez , F. & Gorsky , G. ( 2003 ) Annual microplankton cycles Graham , S.L. & Strom , S.L. ( 2010 ) Growth and grazing of
in Villefranche Bay, Ligurian Sea, NW Mediterranean . microzooplankton in response to the harmful alga H eter-
Journal of Plankton Research , 25 , 323 – 339 . osigma akashiwo in prey mixtures . A quatic Microbial Ecology ,
* Gong , J. , Song , W. & Warren , A. ( 2005 ) Periphytic ciliate 59 , 111 – 124 .
colonization: annual cycle and responses to environmental Granhag , L. , Moller , L.F. & Hansson , L.J. ( 2011 ) Size - specifi c
conditions . Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 39 , 156 – 170 . clearance rates of the ctenophore M nemiopsis leidyi based

References 261
on in situ gut content analyses . J ournal of Plankton Research , note on an unicellular organism parasitic on the latter . P ro-
33 , 1043 – 1052 . ceedings of the Imperial Academy of Japan 8 , 209 – 212 .
* Graziano , C. ( 1989 ) On the ecology of tintinnids (Ciliophora: * Hada , Y. ( 1932b ) Report of the biological survey of Mutsu
Oligotrichida) in the North Irish Sea . Estuarine , Coastal and Bay. 24. The pelagic Ciliata, suborder Tintinnoinea .
Shelf Science , 29 , 233 – 245 . Science Reports of the Tohoku Imperial University , 7 , 553 –
Greuet , C. , Gayol , P. , Salvano , P. & Laval - Peuto , M. ( 1986 ) 573 .
Preliminary report on the ultrastructural organization of * Hada , Y. ( 1932c ) The Tintinnoinea from the Sea of Okhotsk
the contractile appendix of Tontonia appendiculariformis and its neighborhood . Journal of the Faculty of Science
(Ciliophora Oligotrichina) . C ell Motility and the Cytoskeleton , Hokkaido Imperial University , 2 , 37 – 59 .
6 , 217 – 224 . * Hada , Y. ( 1937 ) The fauna of Akkeshi Bay IV. The pelagic
Grover , J.J. (1 998) Feeding habits of pelagic summer fl ounder, Ciliata . J ournal of the Faculty of Science Hokkaido Imperial
Paralichthys dentatus , larvae in oceanic and estuarine habi- University , 5 , 143 – 216 .
tats . Fishery Bulletin , 96 , 248 – 257 . Hada , Y. ( 1938 ) Studies on the Tintinnoinea from the Western
Gr ü n , B. & Blau , J. ( 1996 ) Phylogenie, Systematik und Bios- Tropical Pacifi c . J ournal of the Faculty of Science Hokkaido
tratigraphie der Calpionellidae Bonet, 1956: neue Daten Imperial University , Series 6, Zoology , 6 , 87 – 190 .
aus dem Rosso Amonitico Superiore und dem Biancone Hada , Y. ( 1964 ) New species of the Tintinnida found from the
(Oberjura/Unterkreide: Tithon- Valangin) von Ra Stua Inland Sea . Bulletin Suzugamine Women ’ s College, Natural
(Prov. Belluno, Italien) . R evue Pal é obiologie , 15 , 571 – 595 . Sciences , 11 , 1 – 4 .
Gr ü n , B. & Blau , J. ( 1997 ) New aspects of calpinonellid bio- * Hada , Y. ( 1970 ) The protozoan plankton of the Antarctic
chronology: proposal for a revised calpionellid zonal and and Subantarctic Seas . Japanese Antarctic Research Expedi-
subzonal division . R evue Pal é obiologie , 16 , 197 – 214 . tion, Scientifi c Reports, Series E , 31 , 1 – 51 .
Guillard , R.R.L. & Kilham , P. ( 1977 ) The ecology of marine * Hada , Y. ( 1972 ) Studies on plankton organisms in Akkeshi
planktonic diatoms. In The Biology of Diatoms ( W. Werner Bay, eastern district of Hokkaido, Japan. In Biological Ocea-
ed.), pp. 372 – 469 , University of California Press , Berkely . nography of the Northern North Pacifi c Ocean ( A.Y. Takenouti
Guillou , L. , Viprey , M. , Chambouvet , A. , Welsh , R.M. , ed.), pp. 173 – 188 , Idemitsu - shoten , Tokyo .
Kirkham , A.R. , Massana , R. , Scanlan , D.J. & Worden , A.Z. Haeckel , E. ( 1873 ) Ueber einige neue pelagische Infusorien .
( 2008 ) Widespread occurrence and genetic diversity of Jenaische Zeitschrift f ü r Naturwissenschaft , 7 (year 1871),
marine parasitoids belonging to Syndiniales (Alveolata) . 561 – 568 + Plates 27, 28.
Environmental Microbiology , 10 , 3349 – 3365 . Haeckel , E. ( 1893 ) Plankton studies: a comparative investi-
Guindon , S. , Dufayard , J.F. , Lefort , V. , Anisimova , M. , Hordijk , gation of the importance and constitution of the pelagic
W. & Gascuel , O. ( 2010 ) New algorithms and methods to fauna and fl ora (translated by G.W. Field) . Report of the
estimate maximum- l ikelihood phylogenies: assessing the U.S. Commissioner of Fish and Fisheries, for 1889 to 1891 ,
performance of PhyML3.0 . Systematic Biology , 59 , 307 – pp 565 – 641 .
321 . Haeckel , E. ( 1904 ) Kunstformen der Natur. Verlag des Biblio-
Gunderson , J.H. , John , S.A. , Boman , W.C. & Coats , D.W. graphischen Instituts, Leipzig and Vienna.
( 2002 ) Multiple strains of the parasitic dinofl agellate Amoe- Haley , S.T. , Juhl , A.R. , Keafer , B.A. , Anderson , D.M. &
bophrya exist in Chesapeake Bay. J ournal of Eukaryotic Dyhrman , S.T. ( 2011 ) Detecting copepod grazing on low -
Microbiology , 49 , 469 – 474 . concentration populations of Alexandrium fundyense using
Gustafson , D.E. , Stoecker , D.K. , Johnson , M.D. , Van Heukelem , PCR identifi cation of ingested prey . Journal of Plankton
W.F. & Sneider , K. ( 2000 ) Cryptophyte algae are robbed of Research , 33 , 927 – 936 .
their organelles by the marine ciliate Mesodinium rubrum . Hall , M.S. & Katz , L.A. ( 2011 ) On the nature of species:
Nature , 405 , 1049 – 1052 . insights fromParamecium and other ciliates . G enetica , 139 ,
Guti é rrez, J.C. , Mart í n - Gonz á lez , A. & Matsusaka , T. ( 1990 ) 677 – 684 .
Towards a generalized model of encystment (cryptobiosis) Hall , N. , Litaker , R. , Fensin , E. , Adolf , J. , Bowers , H. , Place , A.
in ciliates: a review and a hypothesis . B ioSystems , 24 , & Paerl , H. ( 2008 ) Environmental Factors Contributing
17 – 24 . to the Development and Demise of a Toxic Dinofl agellate
Guti é rrez , J.C. , Callejas , S. , Boniquel , S. , Ben í tez , L. & (Karlodinium venefi cum ) Bloom in a Shallow, Eutrophic,
Mart í n - Gonz á lez , A. ( 2001 ) Ciliate cryptobiosis: a micro- Lagoonal Estuary . Estuaries and Coasts 31 , 402 – 418 .
bial strategy against environmental starvation . I nterna- Hamm , C.E. & Smetacek , V. ( 2007 ). Armor: why, when, and
tional Microbiology , 4 , 151 – 157 . how. In Evolution of Primary Producers in the Sea . ( P.G.
Guti é rrez, J.C. , D í az , S. , Ortega , R. & Mart í n - Gonz á lez , A. Falkowski and A.E. Knoll , A.E. eds.), pp. 311 – 332 , Elsevier ,
( 2003 ) Ciliate resting cyst walls: a comparative review . Amsterdam .
Recent Research Developments in Microbiology , 7 , 361 – 379 . Hammersmith , R.L. ( 1976 ) Differential cortical degradation
* Hada , Y. ( 1932a ) Descriptions of two new neritic Tintin- in the two members of early conjugant pairs of O xytricha
noinea, Tintinnopsis japonica and Tps. kofoidi with a brief fallax . Journal of Experimental Zoology , 196 , 45 – 69 .

262 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Hansen , B. Hansen , P.J. , and Nielsen , T.G. ( 1991 ) Effects of bia River Estuary and Adjacent Ocean Waters ( A.T. Pruter , D.L.
large nongrazable particles on clearance and swimming Alverson eds), pp. 265 – 278 , University of Washington
behaviour of zooplankton . J ournal of Experimental Marine Press , Seattle .
Biology and Ecology , 152 , 257 – 269 . Harrison , G.W. ( 1995 ) Comparing predator - prey models to
Hansen , B. , Bjornsen , P.K. & Hansen , P.J. ( 1994 ) The size ratio Luckinbill ’ s experiment with D idinium and Paramecium .
between planktonic predators and their prey. Limnology Ecology , 76 , 357 – 374 .
and Oceanography , 39 , 395 – 403 . Harvey , E.L. and Menden - Deuer , S. ( 2011 ) Avoidance, move-
Hansen , B .W. & Jensen , F. ( 2000 ) Specifi c growth rates of ment, and mortality: The interactions between a protistan
protozooplankton in the marginal ice zone of the central grazer and Heterosigma akashiwo , a harmful algal bloom
Barents Sea during spring . J ournal of the Marine Biological species . Limnology and Oceanography , 56 , 371 – 378 .
Association of the United Kingdom , 80 , 37 – 44 . * Hattori , H. , Yuki , K. , Zaitsev , Y.P. & Motada , S. ( 1983 ) A pre-
Hansen , J. , Bjornsen , P.K. & Hansen , B.W. ( 1997 ) Zooplank- liminary observation on the neuston in Suruga Bay . La Mer,
ton grazing and growth: scaling within the 2 – 2,000 μ m Tokyo 21 , 11 – 20 .
body size range . Limnology and Oceanography ; 42 , 687 – Hausmann , K. ( 1978 ) Extrusive organelles in protists . I nter-
704 . national Review of Cytology , 52 , 197 – 276 .
* Hansen , P.J. ( 1989 ) The red tide dinofl agellate A lexandrium Hausmann , K. & Bradbury , P.C. ( 1996 ). Ciliates: Cells as Organ-
tamarense : effects on behaviour and growth of a tintinnid isms . Gustav Fischer , Stuttgart .
ciliate . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 53 , 105 – 116 . Hausmann , K. , H ü lsmann , N. & Radek , R. ( 2003 ) P rotistology
Hansen , P.J. ( 1995 ) Growth and grazing response of a ciliate 3rd Ed, E. Schweizerbart, Stuttgart.
feeding on the red tide dinofl agellate Gyrodinium aureolum Hebert , P.D.N. , Cywinska , A. , Ball , S.L. & deWaard , J.R.
in monoculture and in mixture with a non - toxic alga . ( 2003a ) Biological identifi cations through DNA barcodes .
Marine Ecology Progress Series , 121 , 65 – 72 . Proceedings of the Royal Society , L ondon, Series B, 270 , 313 –
Hansen , P .J. ( 2011 ) The role of photosynthesis and food 321 .
uptake for the growth of marine mixotrophic dino- Hebert , P.D.N. , Ratnasingham , S. & deWaard , J.R. ( 2003b ) Bar-
fl agellates . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 58 , 203 – coding animal life: cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 diver-
214 . gences among closely related species . P roceedings of the Royal
Hansen , P.J. , Cembella , A.D. & Moestrup , O. ( 1992 ) The Society , London, Series B (Supplement), 270 , S96 – S99 .
marine dinofl agellate Alexandrum Ostenfeldii : paralytic Heckmann , K. ( 1983 ) Endosymbiosis of E uplotes . Interna-
shellfi sh toxin concentration, composition and toxicity to a tional Review of Cytology , 14 (Suppl.), 111 – 144 .
tintinnid ciliate . J ournal of Phycology , 28 , 597 – 603 . Hedges , J.I. ( 2002 ) Why dissolved organics matter . In
Hansen , V.K. & Andersen , K.P. ( 1962 ) Sampling the smaller Biogeochemistry of Marine Dissolved Organic Matter ( D.A.
zooplankton . Rapports Proces - verbaux R é union Conseil Inter- Hansell , C.E. Carlson eds), pp. 1 – 34 , Academic Press ,
national Exploration Mer , 153 , 39 – 47 . Amsterdam .
* Hara , S. & Tanoue , E. ( 1985 ) Protists along 150 E in the * Hedin , H. ( 1974 ) Tintinnids on the Swedish West Coast .
Southern Ocean: Its composition, stock, and distribution . Zoon , 2 , 123 – 133 .
Transactions of the Tokyo University of Fisheries , 6 , 99 – * Hedin , H. ( 1975a ) On the ecology of tintinnids on the
115 . Swedish west coast . Z oon , 3 , 125 – 140 .
Harada , A. , Ohtsuka , S. & Horiguchi , T. ( 2007 ) Species of the * Hedin , H. ( 1975b ) On the ultrastructure of F avella ehren-
parasitic genus D uboscquella are members of the enigmatic bergii (Clapar è de & Lachmann) and Parafavella gigantea
marine alveolate Group I . Protist , 158 , 337 – 347 . (Brandt), Protozoa, Ciliata, Tintinnida . Z oon , 3 , 11 – 18 .
Harding , G.C.H. ( 1974 ) The food of deep - sea copepods . * Hedin , H. ( 1976a ) Examination of the tintinnid ciliate P ara-
Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United favella denticulata (Ehrenberg) by scanning electron micro-
Kingdom , 54 , 141 – 155 . scopy and the bodian protargol technique . A cta Zoologica
Hardy , A.C. ( 1924 ) The herring in relation to its animate envi- Fennica , 57 , 113 – 118 .
ronment. Part 1. On food and feeding habits of the herring * Hedin , H. ( 1976b ) Microtubules and microfi laments in
with special reference to the East Coast of England. Fishery the tintinnid ciliate Ptychocylis minor J ö rgensen . Zoon , 4 ,
Investigations, Ministry of Agriculture, Fishery and Food, 3 – 10 .
Series 2 Sea Fishery 7 , 3 . Hedin , H. ( 1976 ) On the Ecology and Cytology of Tintinnids.
Hardy , A.C. ( 1965 ) T he Open Sea: Its Natural History , one Ph.D. dissertation, Institute of Zoology, University of
volume edtion. Houghton Miffl in Company , Boston . Upsalla, Sweden.
* Hargraves , P.E. ( 1981 ) Seasonal variations of tintinnids (Cili- Hedley , R.H. ( 1960 ) The iron - containing shell of G romia
ophora, Oligotrichida) in Narragansett Bay, Rhode Island, oviformis (Rhizopoda) . Quarterly Journal of Microscopical
U.S.A . Journal of Plankton Research 3 , 81 – 91 . Science , 101 , 279 – 293 .
Harman , R.A. ( 1972 ) The distribution of microbiogenic sedi- Hedley , R.H. ( 1963 ) Cement and iron in the arenaceous
ment near the mouth of the Columbia River. In The Colum- foraminifera . Micropaleontology , 9 , 433 – 441 .

References 263
Hedley , R.H. & Rudall , K.M. ( 1974 ) Extracellular silk fi bres * Hermosilla , J.G. ( 1973 ) Contribucion al conocimiento sis-
in Stannophyllum (Rhizopodea: Protozoa) . Cell and Tissue tematico de los dinofl agelados y tintinidos del Archipelago
Research , 150 , 107 – 111 . de Juan Fernandez . B oln Soc. Biol. Concepcion , 46 , 11 – 36 .
* Heinbokel , J.F. ( 1977 ) Functional and Numerical Responses * Hermosilla , J.G. ( 1975 ) Contribucion al conocimiento de los
of Coastal Tintinnids: Implications for the Neritic Food dinofl agelados y tintinidos de Antarctica. I. Plancton
Chain. Ph.D. Thesis, University of California, San Diego. colectado en Diciembre, 1969 . G ayana , 34 , 3 – 55 .
* Heinbokel , J.F. ( 1978a ) Studies on the functional role of tin- * Hernandez - Becerril , D.U. ( 1992 ) Observations on two closely
tinnids in the southern California Bight. I. Grazing and related species, Chaetoceros tetrastichon and C. dadayi
growth rates in laboratory cultures . M arine Biology , 47 , (Bacillariophyceae) . N ordic Journal of Botany , 12 , 365 –
177 – 189 . 371 .
* Heinbokel , J.F. ( 1978b ) Studies on the functional role of tin- * Hernroth , L. ( 1983 ) Marine pelagic rotifers and tintinnids –
tinnids in the southern California Bight. II. Grazing rates of important trophic links in the spring plankton community
fi eld populations . Marine Biology , 47 , 191 – 197 . of Gullmar Fjord, Sweden . Journal of Plankton Research , 5 ,
* Heinbokel , J.F. ( 1987 ) Diel periodicities and rates of repro- 835 – 846 .
duction in natural populations of tintinnines in the Hillebrand , H. ( 2004 ) Strength, slope and variability of
oligotrophic waters off Hawaii, September 1982 . M arine marine latitudinal gradients . Marine Ecology Progress Series ,
Microbial Food Webs , 2 , 1 – 14 . 273 , 251 – 267 .
* Heinbokel , J.F. ( 1988 ) Reproductive rates and periodicities of * Hilliard , D.K. ( 1968 ). Tintinnidium ephemeridum n. sp. A new
oceanic tintinnine ciliates. Marine Ecology Progress Series , freshwater tintinnid from Alaska with notes on the algae
47 , 239 – 248 . attached to its test . H ydrobiologia , 31 , 385 – 401 .
* Heinbokel , J.F. & Beers , J.R. ( 1979 ) Studies on the functional Hjort , J. ( 1914 ) Fluctuations in the Great Fisheries of North-
role of tintinnids in the southern California Bight. III. ern Europe . R apports et Proc è s - Verbaux des R é unions du
Grazing impact of natural assemblages. M arine Biology , 52 , Conseil International pour l’ Exploration de la Mer , 20 ,
23 – 32 . 1 – 228 .
* Heinbokel , J.F. & Coats , D.W. ( 1984 ) Reproductive dynamics Hobbie , J.E. , Daley , R.J. & Jasper , S. ( 1977 ) Use of nuclepore
of ciliates in the Antarctic ice - edge zone . A ntarctic Journal fi lters for counting bacteria by fl uorescence microscopy .
of the United States , 19 , 111 – 113 . Applied and Environmental Microbiology , 33 , 1225 – 1228 .
* Heinbokel , J.F. & Coats , D.W. ( 1986 ) Patterns of tintinnine Hofker , J. ( 1931a ) Studien ü ber Tintinnoidea . A rchiv f ü r Pro-
abundance and reproduction near the edge of seasonal tistenkunde , 75 , 315 – 402 .
pack - ice in the Weddell Sea, November 1983 . Marine Hofker , J. ( 1931b ) Die Bildung der Tintinnengeh ä use . T ijd-
Ecology Progress Series , 33 , 71 – 80 . schrift der Nederlandsche Dierkundige Vereeniging, Serie 3 , 2 ,
Heinbokel , J.F. , Coats , D.W. , Henderson , K.W. & Tyler , M.A. 144 – 150 .
( 1988 ) Reproduction rates and secondary production of Holder , M. & Lewis , P.O. ( 2003 ) Phylogeny estimation: tradi-
three species of the rotifer genus S ynchaeta in the estuarine tional and Bayesian approaches . Nature Reviews Genetics ,
Potomac River . Journal of Plankton Research , 10 , 659 – 4 , 275 – 284 .
697 . Holst , H. , Zimmermann , H. Kausch , H. & Koste , W. ( 1998 )
Hemmersbach , R. , Braun , M. ( 2006 ) Gravity - sensing and Temporal and spatial dynamics of planktonic rotifers in
gravity - related signaling pathways in unicellular model the Elbe Estuary during spring . E stuarine, Coastal and Shelf
systems of protists and plants . Signal Transduction , 6 , Science , 47 , 261 – 274 .
432 – 442 . Holt , A.R. , Gaston , K.J. & He , F.L. ( 2002 ) Occupancy –
Hemmersbach - Krause , R. Briegleb , W. Hader , D. - P. , Vogel , K. , abundance relationships and spatial distribution: a review .
Klein , S. & Muslisch , M. ( 1994 ) Protozoa as model systems Basic and Applied Ecology , 3 , 1 – 13 .
for the study of cellular responses to altered gravity condi- Honjo , S. , Okada , H. ( 1974 ) Community structure of coccol-
tions . A dvances Space Research , 14 , 49 – 60 . ithophores in the photic layer of the mid - Pacifi c . Micropal-
Hennig , W. ( 1966 ) Phylogenetic Systematics . University of Illi- eontology , 20 , 209 – 230 .
nois Press , Urbana, Chicago . * Hopkins , T.L. ( 1966 ) The plankton of the St. Andrew Bay
Hentschel , V.E. ( 1950 ) Die nahrung der heringslarven . system, Florida . P ublications of the Institute of Marine Science
Helgolander Wissenschaftliche Meeresuntersuchungen , 3 , 59 – of the University of Texas 11 , 12 – 64 .
81 . Hopkins , T.L. ( 1987 ) Midwater food web in McMurdo Sound,
Hermes , J.J. ( 1966 ) Tintinnids from the Silurian of the Betic Ross Sea, Antarctica . M arine Biology , 96 , 93 – 106 .
Cordilleras, Spain . Revue de Micropaleontologie , 8 , 211 – Hoppenrath , M. , Yubuki , N. , Bachvaroff , T.R. & Leander , B.S.
214 . ( 2010 ) Re - classifi cation of Pheopolykrikos hartmanii as
* Hermosilla , J.G. ( 1972 ) Variacion estacional de los dino- Polykrikos (Dinophyceae) based partly on the ultrastructure
fl agelados y tintinidos en la Bahia de Concepcion, Chile . of complex extrusomes . E uropean Journal of Phycology , 45 ,
Boln Soc. Biol. Concepcion , 44 , 149 – 159 . 29 – 37 .

264 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Horsted , S.J. , Nielsen , T.G. , Riemann , B. , Poc - Steen , J. & isms in marine sediments . B ulletin of the Plankton Society of
Bjornsen , P.K. ( 1988 ) Regulation of zooplankton by sus- Japan , 31 , 123 – 124 .
pension - feeding bivalves and fi sh in estuarine enclosures . Imai , I. , Yamaguchi , M. & Watanabe , M. ( 1998 ) Ecophysiol-
Marine Ecology Progress Series , 48 , 217 – 224 . ogy, life cycle, and bloom dynamics of Chattonella in the Seto
Horwitz , P. & Wilcox , B.A. ( 2005 ) Parasites, ecosystems and Inland Sea Japan. In Physiological Ecology of Harmful Algal
sustainability: an ecological and complex systems perspec- Blooms ( D.M. Anderson , A.D. Cembella , and G.M. Hallegra-
tive . International Journal for Parasitology , 35 , 725 – 732 . eff eds), pp. 95 – 112 , Springer - Verlag , Berlin .
Houde , E.D. & Lovdal , J.A. ( 1984 ) Seasonality of occurrence, Irigoien , X. , Flynn , K.J. & Harris , R.P. ( 2005 ) Phytoplankton
foods and food preferences of ichthyoplankton in Biscayne blooms: a ‘ loophole ’ in microzooplankton grazing impact?
Bay, Florida . Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science , 18 , Journal of Plankton Research , 27 , 313 – 321 .
403 – 419 . Ishikawa , A. & Taniguchi , A. ( 1994 ) The role of cysts on
Huang , B. , Xiang , W. , Zeng , X. , Chiang , K. - P. , Tian , H. , Hu , J. , population dynamics of Scrippsiella spp. (Dinophyceae)
Lan , W. & Hong , H. ( 2011 ) Phytoplankton growth and in Onagawa Bay, northeast Japan . M arine Biology , 119 ,
microzooplankton grazing in a subtropical coastal 39 – 44 .
upwelling system in the Taiwan Strait. Continental Shelf Ishikawa , A. & Taniguchi , A. ( 1996 ) Contribution of benthic
Research , 31 , S48 – S56 . cysts to the population dynamics of S crippsiella spp. (Dino-
Hudson , P.J. , Dobson , A.P. & Lafferty , K.D. ( 2006 ) Is a healthy phyceae) in Onagawa Bay, northeast Japan . M arine Ecology
ecosystem one that is rich in parasites? T rends in Ecology and Progress Series , 140 , 169 – 178 .
Evolution , 21 , 381 – 385 . Itakura , S. & Yamaguchi , M. ( 2005 ) Morphological and physi-
Huldtgren , T. , Cunningham , J.A. , Yin , C. , Stampanoni , M. , ological differences between the cysts of Alexandrium cat-
Marone , F. , Donoghue , P.C.J. & Bengtson , S. ( 2011 ) Fossil- enella and A . tamarense (Dinophyceae) in the Seto Inland
ized nuclei and germination structures identify Ediacaran Sea, Japan . P lankton Biology and Ecology , 52 , 85 – 91 .
“ animal embryos ” as encysting protists . S cience , 334 , Itakura , S. , Imai , I. & Itoh , K. ( 1991 ) Spatial distribution
1696 – 1699 . of cysts of the noxious red tide fl agellates C hattonella
* Hunt , G.W. & Chien , S.M. ( 1983 ) Seasonal distribution, com- (Raphidophyceae) in sediments of the eastern Seto Inland
position and abundance of the planktonic Ciliata and Testa- Sea, Japan . N ippon Suisan Gakkaishi , 57 , 1079 – 1088 .
cea of Cayuga Lake . H ydrobiologia , 98 , 257 – 266 . Itaoka , M. & Tamai , K. ( 1993 ) Effects of eutrophication on the
Huntley , M. , Sykes , P. , Rohan , S. & Marin , V. ( 1986 ) Chemi- structure of meiobenthic communities in Hiroshima Bay .
cally - mediated rejection of dinofl agellate prey by the Benthos Research , 45 , 19 – 28 .
copepodsCalanus pacifi cus and P aracalanus parvus : mecha- Jacobson , D.M. & Anderson , D.M. ( 1996 ) Widespread phago-
nism, occurrence and signifi cance . Marine Ecology Progress cytosis of ciliates and other protists by marine mixotrophic
Series , 28 , 105 – 120 . and heterotrophic thecate dinofl agellates . Journal of Phycol-
Hutchinson , G.E. ( 1961 ) The paradox of the plankton . A meri- ogy , 32 , 279 – 285 .
can Naturalist 95 , 137 – 145 . Jakobsen , H.H. ( 2001 ) Escape response of planktonic protists
Ichinomiya , M. , Nakamachi , M. & Taniguchi , A. ( 2004 ) A to fl uid mechanical signals. Marine Ecology Progress Series ,
practical method for enumerating cysts of ciliates in natural 214 , 67 – 78 .
marine sediments . A quatic Microbial Ecology , 37 , 305 – Jakobsen , H.H. & Hansen , P.J. ( 1997 ) Prey size selection,
310 . grazing and growth response of the small heterotrophic
Ichinomiya , M. , Nakamachi , M. , Honda , M. , Fukuchi , M. & dinofl agellate Gymnodinium sp. and the ciliate Balanion
Taniguchi , A. ( 2009 ) Role of heterotrophic dinofl agellates comatum – a comparative study . Marine Ecology Progress
in the fate of diatoms released from fast ice in coastal water Series , 158 , 75 – 86 .
of L ü tzow - Holm Bay, East Antarctica . M arine Ecology Jakobsen , H.H. & Montagnes , D.J.S. ( 1999 ) A redescription
Progress Series , 383 , 27 – 36 . of Balanion comatum Wulff, 1919 (Prorodontida, Cilio-
ICZN [= International Commission on Zoological Nomencla- phora), with notes on its cultivation and behaviour . Journal
ture] ( 1999 ) I nternational Code of Zoological Nomenclature , of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 46 , 198 – 205 .
Fourth Edition Adopted by the International Union of Biological Jakobsen , H.H. , Hyatt , C. & Buskey , E.J. ( 2001 ) Growth and
Sciences . The International Trust for Zoological Nomencla- grazing on the ‘ Texas brown tide ’ alga A ureoumbra lagunen-
ture , The Natural History Museum , London . sis by the tintinnid Amphorides quadrilineata . Aquatic Micro-
Imai , I. & Itakura , S. ( 1991 ) Densities of dormant cells of bial Ecology , 23 , 245 – 252 .
the red tide fl agellate Heterosigma akashiwo (Raphidophyc- Jakobsen , H.H. , Halvorsen , E. , Hansen , B.W. & Visser , A.W.
eae) in bottom sediments of northern Hiroshima Bay, ( 2005 ) Effects of prey motility and concentration on feeding
Japan . Bulletin of Japanese Society of Microbial Ecology , 6 , inAcartia tonsa and T emora longicornis : the importance of
1 – 7 . feeding modes . Journal of Plankton Research , 27 , 775 – 785 .
Imai , I. , Itoh , K. & Anraku , M. ( 1984 ) Extinction dilution * James , M.R. ( 1989 ) Role of zooplankton in the nitrogen cycle
method for enumeration of dormant cells of red tide organ- off the west coast of the South Island, New Zealand, winter

References 265
1987 . New Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater Jonsson , P.R. ( 1994 ) Tidal rhythm of cyst formation in the
Research , 23 , 507 – 518 . rock pool ciliate Strombidium oculatum Gruber (Ciliophora,
Janson , S. , Gisselson , L. - Å . , Salomon , P.S. & Gran é li , E. ( 2000 ) Oligotrichida): a description of the functional biology and
Evidence for multiple species within the endoparasitic dino- an analysis of the tidal synchronization of encystment .
fl agellate Amoebophrya ceratii as based on 18S rRNA gene - Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology , 175 ,
sequence analysis . Parasitology Research , 86 , 929 – 933 . 77 – 103 .
Jenkins , G.P. ( 1987 ) Comparative diets, prey selection, and Jonsson , P.R. , Johansson , M. & Pierce , R.W. ( 2004 ) Attach-
predatory impact of co - occurring larvae of two fl ounder ment to suspended particles may improve foraging and
species . J ournal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology , reduce predation risk for tintinnid ciliates . L imnology and
110 , 147 – 170 . Oceanography , 49 , 1907 – 1914 .
Jenkins , G.P. ( 1988 ) Micro - and fi ne - scale distribution of J ö rgensen , E. ( 1924 ) Mediterranean Tintinnids. Report on
microplankton in the feeding environment of larval fl oun- the Danish Oceanographical Expeditions 1908 – 10 2 J.3.
der . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 43 , 233 – 244 . (Biology), 1 – 110.
* Jeong , H.J. , Park , J.K. , Kim , J.S. , Kim , S.T. , Yoon , J.E. , Kim , S.K. J ö rgensen , E. ( 1927 ) Ciliata. Tintinnidae . In D ie Tierwelt der
& Park , Y.M. ( 2000 ) The outbreak of red tides in the coastal Nord - und Ostsee 8,Teil II. c1 ( G. Grimpe , E. Wagler eds),
waters off Kohung, Chonnam, Korea. 3. The temporal and pp. 1 – 26 . Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft , Leipzig .
spatial variations in the heterotrophic dinofl agellates and Jyothibabu , R. , Madhu , N.V. , Jayalakshmi , K.V. , Balachan-
ciliates in 1997 . T he Sea, Journal of the Korean Society of dran , K.K. , Shiyas , C.A. , Martin , G.D. & Nair , K.K.C. ( 2006 )
Oceanography , 5 , 37 – 46 . Impact of freshwater infl ux on microzooplankton mediated
Jeong , H.J. , Yoon , S.Y. , Kim , J.S. , Yoo , Y.D. & Seong , K.A. food web in a tropical estuary (Cochin backwaters – India) .
( 2002 ) Growth and grazing rates of the prostomatid ciliate Estuarine , Coastal and Shelf Science , 69 , 505 – 518 .
Tiarina fusus on red - tide and toxic algae . Aquatic Microbial Kahl , A. ( 1932 ) Urtiere oder Protozoa I: Wimpertiere oder
Ecology 28 , 289 – 297 . Ciliata (Infusoria) Eine Bearbeitung der freilebenden und
Jeong , H.J. , Yoo , Y.D. , Kim , J.S. , Seong , K.A. , Kang , N.S. & ectocommensalen Infusorien der Erde, unter Ausschlu ß
Kim , T.H. ( 2010 ) Growth, feeding and ecological roles der marinen Tintinnidae. 3. Spirotricha . In D ie Tierwelt
of the mixotrophic and heterotrophic dinofl agellates in Deutschlands und der angrenzenden Meeresteile nach ihren
marine planktonic food webs . Ocean Science Journal , 45 , Merkmalen und nach ihrer Lebensweise 25 (ed. F. Dahl ),
65 – 91 . pp. 399 – 650 . G. Fischer , Jena .
Johannes , R.E. ( 1965 ) Infl uence of marine protozoa on nutri- Kaminski , L. , Abu - Qarn , M. , Guan , Z. et al. ( 2010 ) AglJ adds
ent regeneration . Limnology and Oceanography , 1 0 , 434 – the fi rst sugar of the N - linked pentasaccharide decorating
442 . theHaloferax volcanii S - layer glycoprotein . J ournal of Bacte-
* Johansen , P.L. ( 1976 ) A Study of Tintinnids and Other riology , 192 , 5572 – 5579 .
Feeding, Nitrogen Excretion and Reproduction Rates. Ph.D * Kamiyama , T. ( 1994a ) Effects of extracellular products from
Thesis, Dalhousie University, Canada. phytoplankton on the excystment of tintinnids from marine
Johansson , M. , Gorokhova , E. & Larsson , U. ( 2004 ) Annual sediments . M arine Ecology Progress Series , 105 , 199 – 201 .
variability in ciliate community structure, potential prey * Kamiyama , T. ( 1994b ) The impact of grazing by microzoo-
and predators in the open northern Baltic Sea proper . plankton in northern Hiroshima Bay, the Seto Inland Sea,
Journal of Plankton Research , 26 , 67 – 80 . Japan . Marine Biology , 119 , 77 – 88 .
Johnson , M.D. , Rome , M. & Stoecker , D.K. ( 2003 ) Micro- Kamiyama , T. ( 1994c ) Ecological studies on tintinnid ciliates
zooplankton grazing on Prorocentrum minimum and in eutrophic embayment . Ph.D. Dissertation, Tokyo Univer-
Karlodinium micrum in Chesapeake Bay . Limnology and Ocea- sity, Tokyo.
nography , 48 , 238 – 248 . Kamiyama , T. ( 1996 ) Determination of the abundance of
Johnson , M.D. , Tengs , T. , Oldach , D. & Stoecker , D.K. ( 2006 ) viable tintinnid cysts in marine sediments in Hiroshima
Sequestration, performance, and functional control of Bay, the Seto Inland Sea of Japan, using a modifi ed MPN
cryptophyte plastids in the ciliate Myrionecta rubra (Cilio- method . Journal of Plankton Research , 18 , 1253 – 1259 .
phora) . Journal of Phycology , 42 , 1235 – 1246 . * Kamiyama , T. ( 1997a ) Effects of phytoplankton abundance
Joint , I. , Doney , S.C. & Karl , D.M. ( 2011 ) Will ocean acidifi ca- on excystment of tintinnid ciliates from marine sediments .
tion affect marine microbes? I SME Journal , 5 , 1 – 7 . Journal of Oceanography , 53 , 299 – 302 .
Jonsson , P.R. ( 1986 ) Particle size selection, feeding rates and * Kamiyama , T. ( 1997b ) Growth and grazing responses of tin-
growth dynamics of marine planktonic oligotrichous cili- tinnid ciliates feeding on the toxic dinofl agellates Hetero-
ates (Ciliophora: Oligotrichina) . M arine Ecology Progress capsa circularisquama . Marine Biology , 128 , 509 – 515 .
Series , 33 , 265 – 277 . Kamiyama , T. ( 2000 ) Application of a vital staining method
Jonsson , P.R. ( 1989 ) Vertical distribution of planktonic cili- to measure feeding rates of fi eld ciliate assemblages on
ates – an experimental analysis of swimming behaviour . a harmful alga . M arine Ecology Progress Series , 197 ,
Marine Ecology Progress Series , 52 , 39 – 53 . 299 – 303 .

266 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Kamiyama , T. ( 2011 ) Life cycles and ecological roles of plank- Kanwar , K.C. ( 1960 ) Note on the specifi city of mercuric
tonic ciliates . B ulletin of the Plankton Society of Japan , 58 , bromophenol blue for the cytochemical detection of pro-
81 – 86 . teins . Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences , 16 , 355 .
Kamiyama , T. ( 2011 ) Planktonic ciliates as a food source for Karayanni , H. , Christaki , U. , Van Wambeke , F. , Denis , M. &
the scyphozoan A urelia aurita (s.l.): Feeding activity and Moutin , T. ( 2005 ) Infl uence of ciliated protozoa and het-
assimilation of the polyp stage . Journal of Experimental erotrophic nanofl agellates on the fate of primary produc-
Marine Biology and Ecology , 407 , 207 – 215 . tion in the northeast Atlantic Ocean . J ournal of Geophysical
* Kamiyama , T. & Aizawa , Y. ( 1987 ) Growth characteristics Research , 110 , C07S15 .
of two tintinnid ciliates, T intinnopsis beroidea and Amphore- Katz , L.A. , McManus , G.B. , Snoeyenbos - West , O.L.O. , Griffi n ,
lla quadrilineata , in laboratory culture . B ulletin of the Plank- A. , Pirog , K. , Costas , B. & Foissner , W. ( 2005 ) Reframing the
ton Society of Japan , 34 , 185 – 191 . “ Everything is everywhere ” debate: evidence for high gene
* Kamiyama , T. & Aizawa , Y. ( 1990 ) Excystment of tintinnid fl ow and diversity in ciliate morphospecies . Aquatic Micro-
ciliates from marine sediment . Bulletin of the Plankton bial Ecology , 41 , 55 – 65 .
Society of Japan , 36 , 137 – 139 . Kauffman , T.A. , Lindsay , J. , Leithiser , R. ( 1981 ) Vertical distri-
Kamiyama , T. & Aizawa , Y. ( 1992 ) Effects of temperature and bution and food selection of larval atherinids . Rapports et
light on tintinnid excystment from marine sediments . Proces - verbaux des R é unions. Conseil International pour
Nippon Suisan Gakkaishi , 58 , 877 – 884 . l ’ É xploration de la Mer , 178 , 342 – 343 .
Kamiyama , T. & Arima , S. ( 1997 ) Lethal effect of the dinofl ag- Kaulich , B. , Gianoncelli , A. , Beran , A. et al. ( 2009 ) Low -
ellate Heterocapsa circularisquama upon the tintinnid ciliate energy X - ray fl uorescence microscopy opening new oppor-
Favella taraikaensis . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 1 60 , tunities for bio -r elated research . J ournal of the Royal Society
27 – 33 . Interface , 6 , S641 – S647 .
Kamiyama , T. & Arima , S. ( 2001 ) Feeding characteristics of Kemp , P.F. , Sherr , B.F. , Sherr , E.B. & Cole , J.J. ( 1993 ) Handbook
two tintinnid ciliates species on phytoplankton including of Methods in Aquatic Microbial Ecology . Lewis Publishers ,
harmful species: effects on prey size on ingestion rates London .
and selectivity , J ournal of Experimental Marine Biology and Kent , W. Saville ( 1880 – 1882 ) A Manual of the Infusoria:
Ecology , 257 , 281 – 296 . Including a Description of all known Flagellate, Ciliate, and
Kamiyama , T. & Matsuyama , Y. ( 2005 ) Temporal changes in Tentaculiferous Protozoa, British and Foreign, and an
the ciliate assemblage and consecutive estimates of their Account of the Organization and Affi nities of the Sponges .
grazing effect during the course of a H eterocapsa circular- David Bogue, London. p. i – x + 1 – 913 + Plates 1 – 51 (1880:
isquama bloom . Journal of Plankton Research , 27 , 303 – p. i – x + 1 – 472 + Plates 1 – 23; 1881: 473 – 720 + Plates
311 . 24 – 40; 1882: 721 – 913 + Plates 41 – 51).
Kamiyama , T. & Suzuki , T. ( 2006 ) Lack of accumulation of * Kim , D. - Y. & Kim , Y. - O. ( 1990 ) Tintinnina (Ciliophora: Oligot-
paralytic shellfi sh poisoning (PSP) toxins in the tintinnid richida) in the Marian Cove, King George Island . K orean
ciliate F avella taraikaensis feeding on the toxic dinofl agellate Journal of Polar Research , 1 , 1 – 10 .
Alexandrium tamarense . M arine Ecology Progress Series , Kim , D.Y. , Countway , P.D. , Gast , R.J. & Caron , D.A. ( 2011 )
317 , 57 – 65 . Rapid shifts in the structure and composition of a protistan
* Kamiyama , T. & Tsujino , M. ( 1996 ) Seasonal variation in the assemblage affect estimates of total protistan species rich-
species composition of tintinnid ciliates in Hiroshima Bay, ness . Microbial Ecology , 62 , 383 – 398 .
the Seto Inland Sea of Japan . J ournal of Plankton Research , Kim , J.S. , Jeong , H.J. , Str ü eder - Kypke , M.C. et al. ( 2005 ) P ar-
18 , 2313 – 2327 . astrombidinopsis shimi n. gen., n. sp. (Ciliophora: Choreot-
* Kamiyama , T. , Itakura , S. & Nagasaki , K. ( 1995 ) Effects of richia) from the coastal waters of Korea: morphology and
irradiance on excystment of tintinnids from marine sedi- small subunit ribosomal DNA sequence . J ournal of Eukaryo-
ments . J ournal of Oceanography , 51 , 615 – 618 . tic Microbiology , 52 , 514 – 522 .
Kamiyama , T. , Takayama , H. , Nishii , Y. & Uchida , T. ( 2001 ) Kim , S. ( 2006 ) Patterns in host range for two strains of A moe-
Grazing impact of the fi eld ciliate assemblage on a bloom bophrya (Dinophyta) infecting thecate dinofl agellates:
of the toxic dinofl agellate Heterocapsa circularisquama . Amoebophrya spp. ex A lexandrium affi ne and ex G onyaulax
Plankton Biology and Ecology , 48 , 10 – 18 . polygramma . Journal of Phycology , 42 , 1170 – 1173 .
Kamiyama , T. , Tsujino , M. , Matsuyama , Y. and Uchida , T. * Kim , S.Y. , Yang , E.J. , Gong , J. & Choi , J.K. ( 2010 ) Redescrip-
( 2005 ) Growth and grazing rates of the tintinnid ciliate tion of F avella ehrenbergii (Clapar è de and Lachmann, 1858)
Favella taraikaensis on the toxic dinofl agellate Alexan- J ö rgensen, 1924 (Ciliophora: Choreotrichia), with phyloge-
drium tamarense . M arine Biology , 147 , 989 – 997 . netic analyses based on small subunit rRNA gene se-
Kamiyama , T. , Suzuki , T. & Okumura , Y. ( 2006 ) Feeding of the quences . J ournal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 57 , 460 – 467 .
tintinnid ciliate F avella tarakaensis on the toxic dinofl agel- Kim , Y. - O. ( 1995 ) Life Cycle Strategies of Choreotrich Ciliate
late Alexandrium tamarense and the fate of prey toxins . Plankton in Onagawa Bay. Ph.D. Thesis, Tohoku University,
African Journal of Marine Science , 28 , 343 – 346 . Sendai, Japan.

References 267
Kim , Y. - O. & Han , M.S. ( 2000 ) Seasonal relationships between Kofoid , C.A. ( 1897 ) On some important sources of error in
cyst germination and vegetative population of Scrippsiella the plankton method . S cience , 6 , 829 – 832 .
trochoidea (Dinophyceae) . M arine Ecology Progress Series , * Kofoid , C.A. ( 1905 ) Some new Tintinnidae from the plank-
204 , 111 – 118 . ton of the San Diego region . University of California Publica-
Kim , Y. - O. & Taniguchi , A. ( 1995 ) Excystment of the oligot- tions in Zoology 1 , 287 – 306 .
rich ciliate Strombidium conicum . Aquatic Microbial Ecology , Kofoid , C.A. ( 1930 ) Factors in the evolution of the pelagic
9 , 149 – 156 . ciliata, the Tintinnoinea . Contributions to marine biology;
Kim , Y. - O. & Taniguchi , A. ( 1997 ) Seasonal variation of lectures and symposia given at the Hopkins marine station,
excystment pattern of the planktonic oligotrich ciliate December 20 – 21, 1929, at the midwinter meeting of the
Strombidjum conicum . Marine Biology , 128 , 207 – 212 . Western Society of Naturalists . Stanford University Press ,
Kim , Y. - O. , H a , S. & Taniguchi , A. ( 2008 ) Morphology and in Palo Alto, USA , pp. 1 – 39 .
situ sedimentation of the cysts of a planktonic oligotrich Kofoid , C.A. & Campbell , A.S. ( 1929 ) A conspectus of the
ciliate, Strombidium capitatum . Aquatic Microbial Ecology , marine and fresh - water Ciliata belonging to the suborder
53 , 173 – 179 . Tintinnoinea, with descriptions of new species principally
Kim , Y. - O. , Park , M.H. & Han , M.S. ( 2002a ) Role of cyst ger- from the Agassiz Expedition to the Eastern Tropical Pacifi c
mination in the bloom initiation of Alexandrium tamarense 1904 – 1905 . University of California Publications in Zoology ,
(Dinophyceae) in Masan Bay, Korea . A quatic Microbial 34 , 1 – 403 .
Ecology , 29 , 279 – 286 . * Kofoid , C.A. & Campbell , A.S. ( 1939 ) Reports on the scientifi c
Kim , Y. - O. , Suzuki , T. & Taniguchi , A. ( 2002b ) A new species results of the expedition to the Eastern Tropical Pacifi c, in
in the genus Cyrtostrombidium (Ciliophora, Oligotrichia, charge of Alexander Agassiz, by the U.S. Fish Commission
Oligotrichida): its morphology, seasonal cycle and resting Steamer “ Albatross, ” from October, 1904, to March, 1905,
stage . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 49 , 338 – 343 . Lieut. - Commander L.M. Garrett, U.S.N. commanding. 37.
Kim , Y. - O. , Kim , S.Y. , Lee , W. - J. & Choi , J.K. ( 2010 ) New The Ciliata: The Tintinnoinea . B ulletin of the Museum of
observations on the choreotrich ciliate S trombidinopsis Comparative Zoology, Harvard , 84 , 1 – 473 + Plates 1 – 36 .
acuminata Faur é - Fremiet 1924, and comparison with * Kogan , M. ( 2005 ) Estudio de la Composici ó n Especif í ca,
Strombidinopsis jeokjo Jeong et al., 2004 . J ournal of Eukaryo- Abundancia y Distribuci ó n Espacial del Microzooplancton
tic Microbiology , 57 , 48 – 54 . (Protozoos y Micrometazoos) en el Estuario del R í o de la
Kimmance , S. , Atkinson , D. & Montagnes , D.J.S. ( 2006 ) Do Plata (Argentina - Uruguay) . Tesis de Doctor en Ciencias Bio-
temperature – food interactions matter? Responses of produc- logicas de la Universidad de Buenos Aires , 1 – 174 .
tion and its components in the model heterotrophic fl agel- * Komarovsky , B. ( 1959 ) The Tintinnina of the Gulf of Eylath
late Oxyrrhis marina . Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 42 , 63 – 73 . (Aqaba) . Bulletin of the Sea Fisheries Research Station, Israel
* Kimor , B. & Golandsky , B. ( 1977 ) Microplankton of the Gulf 21 , 1 – 40 .
of Elat: aspects of seasonal and bathymetric distribution . * Komarovsky , B. ( 1962 ) Tintinnina from the vicinity of the
Marine Biology , 42 , 55 – 67 . Straits of Tiran and Massawa Region . Bulletin of the Sea
* Kimor , B. & Golandsky - Baras , B. ( 1981 ) Distribution and Fisheries Research Station, Israel , 30 , 48 – 56 .
ecology of tintinnids in the Gulf of Elat (Aqaba) Red Sea . Kooistra , W.H.C.F. , Sarno , D. , Balzano , S. , Gu , H. , Andersen ,
Journal of Plankton Research , 3 , 445 – 459 . R.A. & Zingone , A. ( 2008 ) Global diversity and biogeogra-
* Kimor , B. , Gordon , N. & Neori , A. ( 1992 ) Symbiotic associa- phy of Skeletonema species (Bacillariophyta) . P rotist , 159 ,
tions among microplankton in oligotrophic marine envi- 177 – 193 .
ronments, with special reference to the Gulf of Aqaba, Red Konovalova , G.V. ( 2007 ) Parasitic Peridineae (dinofl agellates)
Sea . Journal of Plankton Research , 14 , 1217 – 1231 . and Ellobiopsidae of coastal waters of the Sea of Japan .
Ki ø rboe , T. ( 2008 ) A Mechanistic Approach to Plankton Ecology . Biologiya - Morya (Vladivostok) , 33 , 167 – 175 .
Princeton University Press , Princeton, USA . Kopylov , A.I. & Tumantseva , N.I. ( 1987 ) Analysis of the
* Kivi , K. , Kuosa , H. & Tanskanen , S. ( 1996 ) An experimental contents of tintinnid food vacuoles and evaluation of
study on the role of crustacean and microprotozoan their contribution to the consumption of phytoplank-
grazers in the planktonic food web . Marine Ecology Progress ton production off the Peru coast . O ceanology , 27 , 343 –
Series , 136 , 59 – 68 . 347 .
Klaas , C. ( 1997 ) Microzooplankton distribution and their Kormos , J. & Kormos , K. ( 1958 ) Die Zellteilungstypen der Pro-
potential grazing impact in the Antarctic Circumpolar tozoen . Acta Biologica Hungarica , 8 , 127 – 148 .
Current . D eep - Sea Research Part II , 44 , 375 – 393 . * Krause , M. & Kattner , G. ( 1989 ) The infl uence of water
Kleppel , G.S. ( 1993 ) On the diets of calanoid copepods . Marine exchange on zooplankton dynamics and species develop-
Ecology Progres Series , 99 , 183 – 195 . ment in a south Norwegian fjord . J ournal of Plankton
Knoll , A.H. ( 2004 ) Life on a Young Planet: the fi rst three billion Research , 11 , 85 – 103 .
years of evolution on Earth . Princeton University Press , Prin- Kremp , A. & Anderson , D.M. ( 2000 ) Factors regulating ger-
ceton, USA . mination of resting cysts of the spring bloom dinofl agellate

268 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Scrippsiella hangoei from the northern Baltic Sea . J ournal of La Touche , R.W. & West , A.B. ( 1980 ) Observations on the
Plankton Research , 22 , 1311 – 1327 . food of Antedon bifi dia (Echinodermata: Crinoidea) . Marine
* Krishnamurthy , K. & Santhanam , R. ( 1978 ) Dictyocysta ses- Biology , 60 , 39 – 46 .
haiyai sp. nov. (Protozoa, Ciliatea, Tintinnida) from Porto Laackmann , H. ( 1906 ) Ungeschlechtliche und geschlechtli-
Novo, India . A rchiv fur Protistenkunde , 120 , 138 – 141 . che Fortpfl angzung der Tintinnen . Z oologischer Anzeiger ,
* Krishnamurthy , K. , Naidu , W.D. & Santhanam , R. ( 1979 ) 30 , 440 – 443 .
Further studies on tintinnids (Protozoa: Ciliata) . A rchiv fur * Laackmann , H. ( 1907 ) Antarktische Tintinnen . Z oologischer
Protistenkunde , 122 , 171 – 180 . Anzeiger , 31 , 235 – 239 .
Krishnan , G. ( 1954 ) The epicuticle of an arachnid, P alamneus Laackmann , H. ( 1908 ) Ungeschlechtliche und geschlecht-
swammerdami . Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science , liche Fortpfl anzung der Tintinnen. Wissenschaftliche
95 , 371 – 381 . Meeresuntersuchungen, Abteilung Kiel , 10 , 13 – 38 + Plates
Krock , B. , Tillman , U. , John , U. & Cembella , A.D. ( 2009 ) Char- 1 – 3 .
acterization of azaspiracids in plankton size - fractions and Laackmann , H. ( 1910 ) Die Tintinnodean der Deutschen S ü d-
isolation of an azaspiracid - producing dinofl agellate from polar - expedition 1901 – 1903. D eutsche S ü dpolar - Expedition .
the North Sea . H armful Algae , 8 , 254 – 263 . XI. Zoologie III , 11 , 340 – 396 .
Krsinc , F. ( 1980 ) Qualitative and quantitative investigtions of * Lackey , J.B. ( 1936 ) Occurrence and distribution of marine
the tintinnids along the eastern coast of the Adriatic . Acta protozoan species in the Woods Hole area . B iological Bulle-
Adriatica , 21 , 19 – 104 . tin , 70 , 264 – 278 .
* Krsinic , F. ( 1982 ) On vertical distribution of tintinnines * Lackey , J.B. & Balech , E. ( 1966 ) A new marine tintinnid .
(Ciliata, Oligotrichida, Tintinnina) in the open waters of the Transactions of the American Microscopical Society , 8 5 ,
South Adriatic . M arine Biology , 68 , 83 – 90 . 575 – 578 .
* Krsinic , F. ( 1987a ) On the ecology of tintinnines in the Bay * Lam - Hoai , T. , Rougier , C. & Lasserre , G. ( 1997 ) Tintinnids
of Mali Ston (Eastern Adriatic) . E stuarine, Coastal and Shelf and rotifers in a northern Mediterranean coastal lagoon.
Science , 24 , 401 – 408 . Structural diversity and function through biomass estima-
* Krsinic , F. ( 1987b ) Tintinnines (Ciliophora, Oligotrichida, tions . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 152 , 13 – 25 .
Tintinnina) in eastern Adriatic bays. E stuarine , Coastal and Landry , M.R. & Calbet , A. ( 2004 ) Reality check on microbial
Shelf Science , 24 , 527 – 538 . food web interactions in dilution experiments: responses to
* Krsinic , F . ( 1988 ) The family Xystonellidae (Ciliophora, Tin- the comments of Dolan and McKeon . Ocean Science Discus-
tinnina) in the Adriatic Sea . Journal of Plankton Research , sions , 1 , 65 – 76 .
10 , 413 – 429 . Landry , M.R. & Hassett , R.P. ( 1982 ) Estimating the grazing
Krsinic , F. ( 2010 ) T intinnids (Tintinnida, Choreotrichia, Ciliata) impact of marine microzooplankton . Marine Biology , 67 ,
in the Adriatic Sea, Mediterranean. Part I Taxonomy, Part II 283 – 288 .
Ecology . Institute of Oceanography and Fisheries , Split, Landry , M.R. , Kirshtein , J. & and Constantinou , J. ( 1995 ) A
Croatia . Refi ned dilution technique for measuring the community
* Kruger , I . ( 1980 ) A checklist of southwest African marine grazing impact of microzooplankton, with experimental
phytoplankton with some phytogeographical relations . tests in the Central Equatorial Pacifi c . Marine Ecology
Fisheries Bulletin, South Africa , 13 , 31 – 53 . Progress Series , 120 , 53 – 63 .
Kucera , F.P. ( 1992 ) Virus - like particles associated with the Larson , R.J. ( 1987 ) Trophic ecology of planktonic gelatinous
apostome ciliate Hyalophysa chattoni . Diseases of Aquatic predators in Saanich Inlet, British Columbia: diets and prey
Organisms , 12 , 151 – 153 . selection . J ournal of Plankton Research , 9 , 811 – 820 .
Kudela , R.M. ( 2010 ) Does horizontal mixing explain phyto- Larson , R.J. ( 1991 ) Diet, prey selection and daily ration of
plankon dynamics? P roceedings of the National Academy of Stomolophus meleagris , a fi lter - feeding Scyphomedusa from
Sciences of the United States of America , 107 , 18235 – the NE Gulf of Mexico . Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science ,
18236 . 32 , 511 – 525 .
Kufferath , H. ( 1950 ) Recherches sur le plancton de la Mer Lasker , R. ( 1981 ) Factors contributing to variable recruit-
fl amande (mer du nord meridionale), I. Quelques fl agell é s, ment of the northern anchovy (E ngraulis mordax ) in the
protistes et “ caetera ” . B ulletin of the Institut Royal des Sci- California Current: contrasting years, 1975 through
ences Naturelles de Belgique , 26 , 1 – 43 . 1978 . R apports et Proc è s - Verbaux des R é unions du Conseil
Kuris , A.M. , Hechinger , R.F. , Shaw , J.C. , et al. ( 2008 ) Ecosys- International pour l’ Exploration de la Mer , 178 , 375 –
tem energetic implications of parasite and free - living 388 .
biomass in three estuaries. N ature , 454 , 515 – 518 . Last , J.M. ( 1978a ) The food of four species of pleuronectiform
* Kuwahara , A. , Kashiwai , M. & Sinoda , M. ( 1975 ) Effects of larvae in the eastern English Channel and southern North
temperature and chlorinity on the microdistribution of Sea . Marine Biology , 45 , 359 – 368 .
Favella tarakaensis Hada (Ciliata) in Maizuru Bay. Last , J.M. ( 1978b ) The food of three species of gadoid larvae
Journal of the Oceanographic Society of Japan , 31 , 109 – in the eastern English Channel and southern North Sea .
114 . Marine Biology , 48 , 377 – 386 .

References 269
Lauckner , G. ( 1980 ) Diseases of protozoa. In Diseases of Le H é garat , G. & Remane , J. ( 1968 ) Tithonique sup é rieur et
Marine Animals ( O. Kinne ed.), Vol. 1 , pp. 75 – 134 , John Berriasien de l ’ Ard è che et de l ’ H é rault. Correlation des
Wiley & Sons , C hichester, UK . Ammonites et des Calpionelles . G é obios , 1 , 7 – 70 .
Laval , M. ( 1971 ) Mise en é vidence par la microscopie é lectro- Leakey , R.J.G. , Burkill , P.H. & Sleigh , M.A. ( 1993 ) Planktonic
nique d ’ un organite d ’ un type nouveau chez les cili é s ciliates in Southampton Water: quantitative taxonomic
Tintinnides . C omptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des Seances de studies . Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the
l Academie des Sciences, Paris, S é rie D , 273 , 1383 – 1386 . United Kingdom , 73 , 579 – 594 .
Laval , M. ( 1972 ) Ultrastructure de P etalotricha ampulla (Fol). Leakey , R.J.G. , Burkill , P.H. & Sleigh , M.A. ( 1994a ) Ciliate
Comparaison avec d ’ autres tintinnides et avec les autres Growth Rates from Plymouth Sound: Comparison of Direct
ordres de cili é s . P rotistologica , 8 , 369 – 386 . and Indirect Estimates . J ournal of the Marine Biological Asso-
Laval - Peuto , M. ( 1975 ) Cortex, p é rilemme et r é ticulum v é si- ciation of the United Kingdom , 74 , 849 – 861 .
culeux deCyttarocylis brandti (cili é Tintinnide). Les cili é s a * Leakey , R.J.G. , Fenton , N. & Clarke , A. ( 1994b ) The annual cycle
p é rilemme . Protistologica , 11 , 83 – 98 . of planktonic ciliates in nearshore waters at Signy Island,
Laval - Peuto , M. ( 1976a ) Intervention des deux tomites du Antarctica . J ournal of Plankton Research , 16 , 841 – 856 .
Tintinnide Favella ehrenbergii (Ciliata, Tintinnina) dans Leakey , R.J.G. , Burkill , P.H. & Sleigh , M.A. ( 1996 ) Planktonic
l ’ edifi cation de sa lorica . Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires ciliates in the northwestern Indian Ocean:their abundance
des Seances de l ’ Academie des Sciences Paris, S é rie D , 2 87 , and biomass in waters of contrasting productivity . J ournal
2187 – 2190 . of Plankton Research , 18 , 1063 – 1071 .
Laval - Peuto , M. ( 1976b ) Ultrastructure de la ciliature et de Leander , B.S. , Clopton , R.E. & Keeling , P.J. ( 2003 ) Phylogeny
l ’ infraciliature adorales de C yttarocylis brandti (cili é ) . Journal of gregarines (Apicomplexa) as inferred from small -
of Protozoology , 23 , 13 A . subunit rDNA and β - tubulin . International Journal of Sys-
Laval - Peuto , M. ( 1977 ) Reconstruction d ’ une lorica de forme tematic and Evolutionary Microbiology , 53 , 345 – 354 .
Coxliella par le trophonte nu de Favella ehrenbergii (Ciliata, Lebour , M.V. ( 1917 ) The microplankton of Plymouth Sound
Tintinnina). Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des Seances de from the region beyond the breakwater . J ournal of the
l ’ Academie des Sciences Paris, S é rie D , 284 , 547 – 550 . Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom , 11 ,
Laval - Peuto , M. ( 1980 ) Ultrastructure of the lorica - wall of 133 – 182 .
Tintinnina (Ciliata, Spirotricha) . Journal of Protozoology , * Lebour , M.V. ( 1918 ) The food of post - larval fi sh . J ournal of
27 , 83 A . the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom , 11 ,
Laval - Peuto , M. ( 1981 ) Construction of the lorica in Ciliata 433 – 469 .
Tintinnina. In vivo study of F avella ehrenbergii : variability Lebour , M.V. ( 1919a ) The food of plankton organisms . J ournal
of the phenotypes during the cycle, biology, statistics, bio- of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom ,
metry . Protistologica , 17 , 249 – 272 . 12 , 644 – 677 .
Laval - Peuto , M. ( 1983 ) Sexual reproduction in F avella ehren- Lebour , M.V. ( 1919b ) The food of young clupeoids . J ournal of
bergii (Ciliophora, Tintinnina). Taxonomical implications . the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom , 12 ,
Protistologica , 19 , 503 – 512 . 458 – 467 .
Laval - Peuto , M. ( 1994 ) Classe des Oligotrichea B ü tschli, Lebour , M.V. ( 1919c ) The food of young fi sh . J ournal of the
1887. Ordre des Tintinnida Kofoid et Campbell, 1929. In Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom , 12 ,
Trait é de Zoologie. Anatomie, syst é matique, biologie. II. Infu- 261 – 324 .
soires cili é s. 2. Syst é matique (ed. P. de Puytorac ), pp. 181 – Lebour , M.V. ( 1924 ) The food of young herring . Journal of the
219 . Masson , Paris . Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom , 13 ,
Laval - Peuto , M. & Barria de Cao , M.S. ( 1987 ) Les capsules, 325 – 330 .
extrusomes caracteristiques des Tintinnina (Ciliophora), Lecal , J. ( 1953 ) Sur deux nouveaux Tintinnides . A rchives de
permettent une classifi cation evolutive des genres et des Zoologie Exp é rimentale et G é n é rale , 91 , 1 – 4 .
familles du sous - ordre. D euxi è me R é union Scientifi que du Lecal , J. ( 1967 ) Le nannoplancton des c ô tes d ’ Isra ë l . H ydrobio-
GRECO 88, Travaux du Comit é R é gional de la M é diterran é e , 8 , logia , 29 , 305 – 387 .
53 – 59 . Leegaard , C. ( 1915 ) Untersuchungen ü ber einige Plankton-
Laval - Peuto , M. & Brownlee , D.C. ( 1986 ) Identifi cation and ciliaten des Meeres . N ytt magazin for naturvidenskaberne ,
systematics of the Tintinnina (Ciliophora): evaluation and 53 , 1 – 37 .
suggestion for improvement . A nnales de l ’ Institut Oceano- * Leegaard , C. ( 1920 ) Microplankton from Finnish waters
graphique, Paris , 62 , 69 – 84 . during the month of May 1912 . Acta Societatis Scientarium
* Laval - Peuto , M. & Rassoulzadegan , F. ( 1988 ) Autofl uo- Fennic ’ , Serie B , 48 , 1 – 48 .
rescece of marine planktonic Oligotrichina and other cili- Lehman , J.T. & Sandgren , C.D. ( 1985 ) Species - specifi c rates of
ates . Hydrobiologia , 159 , 99 – 110 . growth and grazing loss among freshwater algae . L imnol-
Laval - Peuto , M. , Gold , K. & Storm , E.R. ( 1979 ) The ultrastruc- ogy and Oceanography 30 , 34 – 46 .
ture of Tintinnopsis parva . T ransactions of the American Leising , A.W. , Pierson , J.J. , Halsband - Lenk , C. , Horner , R. &
Microscopical Society , 98 , 204 – 212 . Postel , J. ( 2005a ) Copepod grazing during spring blooms:

270 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
DoesCalanus pacifi cus avoid harmful diatoms? Progress in * Ling , H. ( 1965 ) The tintinnid Parafavella gigantea (Brandt)
Oceanography , 67 , 384 – 405 . Kofoid & Campbell, 19 29 , in the North Pacifi c Ocean .
Leising , A.W. , Pierson , J.J. , Halsband - Lenk , C. , Horner , R. & Journal of Paleontology , 39 , 721 – 723 .
Postel , J. (2005b) . Copepod grazing during spring blooms: Ling , H.Y. ( 1992 ) Tintinnids: A Taxon - vertical Distributional
Can Pseudocalanus newmani induce trophic cascades? Study of Settling Assemblages from the Panama Basin. Ocean
Progress in Oceanography , 67 , 406 – 421 . Biocoenosis Series 4, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institu-
Lef è vre , T. , Lebarbenchon , C. , Gauthier - Clerc , M. , Miss é , D. , tion , Woods Hole, USA .
Poulin , R. & Thomas , F. ( 2008 ) The ecological signifi cance Linnaeus , C. ( 1758 ) S ystema naturae per regna tria naturae,
of manipulative parasites . T rends in Ecology and Evolution , secundum classes, ordines, genera, species, cum characteribus,
24 , 41 – 48 . differentiis, synonymis, locis. Tomus 1 ( 10 th edn .). Laurentius
* Lepannen , J. - M. & Bruun , J.E. ( 1988 ) Cycling of organic Salvius , Holmiae .
matter during the vernal growth period in the open north- Lipps , J.H. ( 2006 ) Major Features of Protistan Evolution: Con-
ern Baltic proper. IV. Ciliate and mesozooplankton troversies, Problems and a Few Answers . A nu á rio do Insti-
species composition, biomass, food intake, respiration, tuto de Geoci ê ncias – UFRJ , 29 , 55 – 80 .
and production . F innish Marine Research , 255 , 55 – 78 . Lipscomb , D. ( 1998 ) Basics of Cladistic Analysis . George Wash-
Lessard , E.J. ( 1991 ) The trophic role of heterotrophic dino- ington University , Washington, D.C., USA .
fl agellates in diverse marine environments . Marine Micro- Lipscomb , D.L. ( 1992 ) Parsimony, homology and the analysis
bial Food Webs , 5 , 49 – 58 . of multistate characters . C ladistics , 8 , 45 – 65 .
Lessard , E.J. & Swift , E. ( 1985 ) Species - specifi c grazing rates Litaker , R.W. , Tester , P.A. , Colorni , A. , Levy , M.G. & Noga , E.J.
of heterotrophic dinofl agellates in oceanic waters, meas- ( 1999 ) The phylogenetic relationship of Pfi esteria piscicida ,
ured with a dual - label radioisotope technique . Marine Cryptoperidiniopsoid sp. Amyloodinoum ocellatum and a
Biology , 87 , 289 – 296 . Pfi esteria - like dinofl agellate to other dinofl agellates and api-
Lessard , E.J. & Swift , E. ( 1986 ) Dinofl agellates from the North complexans . Journal of Phycology , 35 , 1379 – 1389 .
Atlantic classifi ed as phototrophic or heterotrophic by epi- * Littlepage , J.L. ( 1968 ) Plankton investigations in McMurdo
fl uorescence microscopy . J ournal of Plankton Research , 8 , Sound . Antarctic Journal of the United States , 3 , 162 – 163 .
1209 – 1215 . Liu , H. , Dagg , M.J. & Strom , S. ( 2005 ) Grazing by the calanoid
* Levinsen , H. , Nielsen , T.G. & Hansen , B.W. ( 1999 ) Plankton copepod Neocalanus cristatus on the microbial food web
community structure and carbon cycling on the western in the coastal Gulf of Alaska . J ournal of Plankton Research ,
coast of Greenland during the stratifi ed summer situation. 27 , 647 – 662 .
II. Heterotrophic dinofl agellates and ciliates . A quatic Micro- Liu , W. , Yi , Z. , Lin , X. & Al - Rasheid , K.A.S. ( 2011 ) Morpho-
bial Ecology , 16 , 217 – 232 . logic and molecular data suggest that Lynnella semiglobulosa
Levy , M.G. , Litaker , R.W. , Goldstein , R.J. , Dykstra , M.J. , n. g., n. sp. represents a new family within the subclass
Vandersea , M.W. & Noga , E.J. ( 2007 ) P iscinoodinium , a fi sh - Choreotrichia (Ciliophora, Spirotrichea) . J ournal of Eukary-
ectoparasitic dinofl agellate, is a member of the class dino- otic Microbiology , 58 , 43 – 49 .
phyceae, subclass gymnodiniphycidae: Convergent Llopiz , J.K. & Cowen , R.K. ( 2009 ) Variability in the trophic role
evolution with Amyloodinium . Journal of Parasitology , 93 , of coral reef fi sh larvae in the oceanic plankton . M arine
1006 – 1015 . Ecology Progress Series , 381 , 259 – 272 .
Li , C. - W. , Chen , J. - Y. , Lipps , J.H. , Gao , F. , Chi , H. - M. & Wu , H. - J. Lobo - da - Cunha , A. & Azevedo , C. ( 1992 ) Virus - like particles
( 2007 ) Ciliated protozoans from the Precambrian Doush- in the fi sh parasite Ichthyophthirius multifi liis (Ciliophora) .
antuo Formation, Wengen, South China. G eological Society , Journal of Fish Diseases , 14 , 273 – 277 .
Special Publications , 286 , 151 – 156 . Loeblich , A .R. III ( 1976 ) Dinofl agellate evolution: speculation
Li , Y. - X. & Zhan , S. - X. ( 2006 ) New material of microfossils and evidence . J ournal of Protozoology , 23 , 13 – 28 .
from Middle Proterozoic in Hubei Province . Acta Palaeonto- Loeblich , A.R. III ( 1982 ) Dinophyceae. In Synopsis and Clas-
logica Sinica , 45 , 102 – 107 . sifi cation of Living Organisms ( S.P. Parker ed.) Vol. 1 , pp.
Li , Y. - X. , Zhang , S. - X. & Zhan , J. ( 2009 ) Mesoproterozoic 101 – 115 , McGraw - Hill , New York .
calymmian tintinnids from central China . O pen Paleontol- Loeblich , A.R. , Jr & Tappan , H. ( 1968 ) Annotated index to
ogy Journal , 2 , 10 – 13 . genera, subgenera and suprageneric taxa of the ciliate
* Li , Z. , Yi , Z. , Yang , J. et al. ( 2009 ) Phylogenetic investigation order Tintinnida . J ournal of Protozoology , 15 , 185 – 192 .
on fi ve genera of tintinnid ciliates (Ciliophora, Choreot- Logares , R. , Rengefors , K. , Kremp , A. , Shalchian - Tabrizi , K. ,
richia), based on the small subunit ribosomal RNA gene Boltovskoy , A. , Tengs , T. , Shurtleff , A. & Klaveness , D.
sequences . Progress in Natural Science , 19 , 1097 – 1101 . ( 2007a ) Phenotypically different microalgal morphospe-
* Lindley , J.A. ( 1975 ) Continuous plankton records: a plank- cies with identical ribosomal DNA: A case of rapid adaptive
ton atlas of the North Atlantic and North Sea: Supplement evolution? Microbial Ecology , 53 , 549 – 561 .
3 – Tintinnida (Protozoa, Ciliophora) in 1965 . B ulletin of Logares , R. , Shalchian - Tabrizi , K. , Boltovskoy , A. & Rengefors ,
Marine Ecology , 8 , 201 – 213 . K. ( 2007b ) Extensive dinofl agellate phylogenies indicate

References 271
infrequent marine - freshwater transitions . M olecular Phylo- logeny . Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the
genetics and Evolution , 45 , 887 – 903 . United Kingdom , 71 , 597 – 612 .
Lohmann , H. ( 1901 ) Ueber das Fischen mit Netzen aus Macpherson , E. ( 2002 ) Large - scale species - richness gradients
M ü llergaze Nr 20 zu dem Zwecke quantitiven Untersuch- in the Atantic Ocean . Proceedings of the Royal Society of
gen des Auftriebs. Wissenschaftliche Meeresuntersuchun- London Series B , 269 , 1715 – 1720 .
gen , Abreilung Kiel , 5 , 46 – 66 . Malone , T.C. ( 1980 ) Algal size . In The Physiological Ecology of
Lohmann , H. (1908) Untersuchungen zur Feststellung Phytoplankton ( I. Morris ed.), pp 433 – 463 , University of
des vollst ä ndigen Gehaltes des Meeres an Plankton . California Press , Berkeley .
Wissenschaftliche Meeresuntersuchungen Kiel , 10 , 131 – * Mamaeva , N.V. ( 1982 ) Planktonic infusorians of the central
370 . part of the Indian Ocean . Soviet Journal of Marine Biology ,
Lohmann , H. ( 1911 ) Ü ber das Nannoplankton und die Zen- 8 , 254 – 258 .
trifugierung kleinster Wasserproben zur Gewinnung * Mamaeva , N.V. ( 1984 ) Planktonic infusorians in the Bering
desselben in lebendem Zustande. Internationale Revue der Sea . Soviet Journal of Marine Biology , 9 , 180 – 185 .
gesamten Hydrobiologie und Hydrographie , 4 , 1 – 38 . Maneiro , I. , Frangopulos , M. , Guisande , C. , Fernandez , M. ,
Lonsdale , D.J. , Caron , D.A. , Dennett , M.R. & Schaffner , R. Reguera , B. & Riveiro , I. ( 2000 ) Zooplankton as a potential
( 2000 ) Predation by Oithona spp. on protozooplankton vector of diarrhetic shellfi sh poisoning toxins through the
in the Ross Sea, Antarctica . D eep - Sea Research II , 4 7 , food web . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 201 , 155 – 163 .
3273 – 3283 . Margalef , R. ( 1957 ) Fitoplancton de las costas de Blanes
* Lubel , M.A.A. ( 1974 ) Distribucion de los tintinidos (Proto- (Gerona) de agosto de 1952 a junio de 1956 . Investigacion
zoa, Ciliatea) de la parte oeste, suroeste y sur del Golfo de Pesquera , 8 , 89 – 96 .
Mexico . R evista de la Sociedad Mexicana de Historia Natural , Margalef , R. ( 1982 ) Some thoughts on the dynamics of popu-
35 , 45 – 76 . lations of ciliates . Annales Institut Oc é anographique Paris 5 8
Lugomela , C. , Wallberg , P. & Nielsen , T.G. ( 2001 ) Plankton ( S ), 15 – 18 .
composition and cycling of carbon during the rainy season Margalef , R. & Dur á n , M. ( 1953 ) Microplancton de Vigo, de
in a tropical coastal ecosystem, Zanzibar, Tanzania . J ournal octubre de 1951 a septiembre de 1952 . P ublicaciones del
of Plankton Research , 23 , 1121 – 1136 . Instituto de Biolog í a Aplicada , 13 , 5 – 78 + Table 1.
Lynn , D.H. ( 1981 ) The organization and evolution of micro- * Margalef , R. , Estrada , M. ( 1987 ) Synoptic distribution of
tubular organelles in ciliated protozoa . Biological Reviews , summer microplankton (algae and protozoa) across the
56 , 243 – 292 . principal front in the western Mediterranean . Investigacion
Lynn , D.H. ( 2008 ) The Ciliated Protozoa. Characterization, Pesquera , Barcelona, 5 1 , 121 – 140 .
Classifi cation and Guide to the Literature , 3rd edn . Springer , * Margalef , R. & Morales , E. ( 1960 ) Fitoplancton de las costas
Berlin . de Blanes (Gerona), de julio de 1956 a junio de 1959 . I nves-
Lynn , D.H. & Montagnes , D.J.S. ( 1988 ) Taxonomic descrip- tigacion Pesquera, Barcelona , 16 , 3 – 31 .
tions of some conspicuous species of strobilidiine ciliates Marret , F. & Zonneveld , K.A.F. ( 2003 ) Atlas of modern
(Ciliophora: Choreotrichida) from the Isles of Shoals, Gulf organic - walled dinofl agellate cyst distribution . Review of
of Maine . Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the Paleobotany and Palynology , 125 , 1 – 200 .
United Kingdom , 68 , 639 – 658 . * Marron - Aguilar , M.A. & Lopez - Ochoterena , E. ( 1969 ) Proto-
Lynn , D.H. & Simpson , A.G.B. ( 2009 ) From the Editors: zarios ciliados de Mexico XVI. Sistematica de algunas espe-
Describing new taxa of unicellular protists . J ournal of cies del orden Tintinnida Kofoid y Campbell, de la Laguna
Eukaryotic Microbiology , 56 , 403 – 405 . de Terminos, Campeche . Revista de la Sociedad Mexicana de
Lynn , D.H. & Small , E.B. ( 2002 ) Phylum Ciliophora Dofl ein, Historia Natural , 30 , 43 – 64 .
1901 . In An Illustrated Guide to the Protozoa . 2nd Edition . Marshall , S. ( 1924 ) The food of C alanus fi nmarchicus during
Organisms traditionally referred to as Protozoa, or newly 1923 . Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the
discovered Groups ( J.J. Lee , G.F. Leedale and P. Bradbury United Kingdom , 13 , 473 – 479 .
eds), pp. 371 – 6 56 . Society of Protozoologists, year 2000. * Marshall , S.M. ( 1934 ) The Silicofl agellata and Tintinnoinea .
Allen Press , Lawrence . Great Barrier Reef Expedition 1928 – 29, Scientifi c Reports,
Lynn , D.H. & Str ü der - Kypke , M.C. ( 2006 ) Species of T etrahy- British Museum of Natural History, London , 4 (no. 15 ),
mena identical by small subunit rRNA gene sequences are 623 – 664 .
discriminated by mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase I Martin , A.J. & Montagnes , D.J.S. ( 1993 ) Winter ciliates in a
gene sequences . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 53 , British Columbian fjord: six new species and an analysis of
385 – 387 . ciliate putative prey . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 40 ,
Lynn , D.H. , Montagnes , D.J.S. , Dale , T. , Gilron , G.L. & Strom , 535 – 549 .
S.L. ( 1991 ) A reassessment of the genus S trombidinopsis Mart í n - Gonz á lez , A. , Wierzchos , J. , Guti é rrez , J.C. , Alonso , J.
(Ciliophora, Choreotrichida) with descriptions of four new & Ascaso , C. ( 2008 ) Morphological stasis of protists in
planktonic species and remarks on its taxonomy and phy- lower Cretaceous amber . P rotist , 159 , 251 – 257 .

272 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
* Massuti Alzamora , M. ( 1929 ) Contribucion al estudio de los Menden - Deuer , S. & Lessard , E.J. ( 2000 ). Carbon to volume
infusorios de la Bahia de Palma Mallorca. Nota segunda. relationships for dinofl agellates, diatoms, and other protist
Publicaciones del Instituto Espa ñ ol de Oceanografi a , 32 , plankton . L imnology and Oceanography , 45 , 569 – 579 .
1 – 11 . Merkle , H. ( 1909 ) Untersuchung an Tintinnodeen der Ost -
* Massuti Alzamora , M. ( 1930 ) El plancton de la Bahia de und Nordsee . Wissenschaftliche Meeresuntersuchungen,
Palma de Mallorca en 1929 . P ublicaciones del Instituto Abteilung Kiel , 11 , 139 – 186 + Plates 2, 3.
Espa ñ ol de Oceanografi a , 43 , 1 – 28 . Meunier , A. ( 1910 ) C ampagne arctique de 1907. Microplankton
* Massuti Alzamora , M. ( 1933 ) Contribucion al estudio de los des mers de Barents et de Kara. Bulens, Bruxelles, Belgium.
infusorios (Nota tercera) Nuevos tintinidos de la Bahia de Meunier , A. ( 1919 ) Microplankton de la mer Flamande: Les
Palma de Mallorca . Publicaciones del Instituto Espa ñ ol de Tintinnides et caetera . M é moires du Mus é e Royal d ’ Histoire
Oceanografi a , 2 , 1 – 14 . Naturelle de Belgique , 8 , 1 – 59 + Plates 22, 23.
Matsuoka , K. & Fukuyo , Y. ( 2000 ) T echnical Guide for Modern * Middlebrook , K. , Emerson , C.W. , Roff , J.C. & Lynn , D.H.
Dinofl agellate Cyst Study . WESTPAC - HAB Asian Natural ( 1987 ) Distribution and abundance of tintinnids in the
Environmental Science Center , Tokyo , p. 29 . Quoddy Region of the Bay of Fundy . C anadian Journal of
Matsusaka , T. ( 2006 ) On the resting cyst of ciliates . J apanese Zoology , 65 , 594 – 601 .
Journal of Protozoology , 39 , 205 – 216 . Miller , C.B. ( 2004 ) B iological Oceanography . Blackwell Publish-
Mauchline , J. ( 1980 ) The biology of mysids and euphausiids . ing , Oxford, UK .
Advances in Marine Biology , 18 , 3 – 681 . Miller , J.J. , Delwiche , C.F. & Coats , D.W. ( 2012 ). Ultrastructure
Mauchline , J. ( 1998 ) The biology of calanoid copepods . of Amoebophrya sp. and its changes during the course
Advances in Marine Biology , 33 , 1 – 710 . of infection . P rotist , in press, DOI:10.1016/j.protis.2011.
Mauchline , J. & Fisher , L.R. ( 1969 ) The biology of euphausi- 11.007.
ids . Advances in Marine Biology , 7 , 1 – 421 . Mills , E.L. ( 1989 ) Biological Oceanography: an Early History,
Mayr , E. & Bock , W.J. ( 2002 ) Classifi cations and other order- 1870 – 1960 . Cornell University Press , Ithaca, USA .
ing systems . J ournal of Zoological Systematics and Evolution- Minter , E.J.A. , Fenton , A. , Cooper , J.C. & Montagnes , D.J.S.
ary Research , 40 , 169 – 194 . ( 2011 ) Prey - dependent mortality rate: a critical parame-
McAllister , C.D. , Parsons , T.R. & Strickland , J.D.H. ( 1960 ) ter in microbial models . Microbial Ecology , 62 , 155 –
Primary productivity and fertility at Station “ P ” in the 161 .
North - East Pacifi c Ocean . Journal du Conseil International Modigh , M. ( 2001 ) Seasonal variations of photosynthetic
pour l ’ Exploration de la Mer , 25 , 240 – 259 . ciliates at a Mediterranean coastal site . Aquatic Microbial
McKinley , M.P. , Bolton , D.C. & Prusiner , S.B. ( 1983 ) A pro- Ecology , 23 , 163 – 175 .
tease - resistant protein is a structural component of the Modigh , M. & Castalado , S. ( 2002 ) Variability and persistence
Scrapie prion . C ell , 35 , 57 – 62 . in tintinid assemblages at a Mediterranean coastal site .
McManus , G.B. & Ederington - Cantrell , M.C. ( 1992 ) Phyto- Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 28 , 299 – 311 .
plankton pigments and growth rates, and microzooplank- Moestrup , O. , Garcia - Cuetos , L. , Hansen , P.J. & Fenchel , T.
ton grazing in a large temperate estuary . M arine Ecology ( 2012 ) Studies on the ciliate M esodinium I. Ultrastructure
Progress Series , 87 , 77 – 85 . and description of M . chamaeleon sp. nov., a benthic marine
McManus , G.B. & Katz , L.A. ( 2009 ) Molecular and morpho- species with green or red chloroplasts. J ournal of Eukaryotic
logical methods for identifying plankton: what makes a Microbiology 59 , in press.
successful marriage? J ournal of Plankton Research , 31 , Montagnes , D.J.S. ( 1996 ) Growth responses of planktonic cili-
1119 – 1129 . ates in the genera Strobilidium and S trombidium . M arine
McManus , G.B. & Okubo , A. ( 1991 ) On the use of surrogate Ecology Progress Series , 130 , 241 – 254 .
food particles to measure protistan ingestion. L imnology and Montagnes , D.J.S. & Berges , J.A. ( 2004 ) Determining param-
Oceanography , 36 , 613 – 617 . eters of the numerical response . M icrobial Ecology , 48 ,
McManus , G.B. , Costas , B.A. , Dam , H.G. , Lopes , R.M. , Gaeta , 139 – 144 .
S.A. , Susini , S. & and Rosetta , C. ( 2007 ) Microzooplankton Montagnes , D.J.S. & Lessard , E.J. ( 1999 ) Population dynamics
grazing of phytoplankton in a tropical upwelling region . of the marine planktonic ciliate S trombidinopsis multiauris :
Hydrobiologia , 5 75 , 69 – 81 . its potential to control phytoplankton blooms . Aquatic
McQuoid , M.R. & Hobson , L.A. ( 1996 ) Diatom resting stages . Microbial Ecology , 20 , 167 – 181 .
Journal of Phycology , 32 , 889 – 902 . Montagnes , D.J.S. & Lynn , D.H. ( 1987 ) A quantitative pro-
Meckler , A.N. , Schubert , C.J. , Hochuli , P.A. , Plessen , B. , Birgel , targol stain (QPS) for ciliates: Method description and test
D. , Flower , B.P. , Hinrichs , K. - U. & Haug , G.H. ( 2008 ) Glacial of its quantitative nature . M arine Microbial Food Webs , 2 ,
to Holocene terrigenous organic matter input to sediments 83 – 93 .
from Orca Basin, Gulf of Mexico – A combined optical and Montagnes , D.J.S. & Lynn , D.H. ( 1991 ) Taxonomy of Chore-
biomarker approach . Earth and Plantary Science Letters , otrichs, the major marine ciliates, with emphasis on the
272 , 251 – 263 . aloricate forms . Marine Microbial Food Webs , 5 , 59 – 74 .

References 273
Montagnes , D.J.S. , Lynn , D.H. , Stoecker , D.K. & Small , E.B. Montresor , M. , Lovejoy , C. , Orsini , L. & Procaccini , G. ( 2003 )
( 1988 ) Taxonomic descriptions of one new species and Bipolar distribution of the cyst - forming dinofl agellate
redescription of four species in the family Strombidiidae Polarella glacialis . Polar Biology , 26 , 186 – 194 .
(Ciliophora, Oligotrichida) . J ournal of Protozoology , 35 , Moon - van der Staay , S. , De Wachter , R. & Vaulot , D. ( 2001 )
189 – 197 . Oceanic 18S rDNA sequences from picoplankton reveal
Montagnes , D.J.S. , Berges , J.A. , Harrison , P.J. & Taylor , F.J.R. unsuspected eukaryotic diversity . Nature , 409 , 607 –
( 1994 ) Estimating carbon, nitrogen, protein, and chloro- 610 .
phyll a from cell volume in marine phytoplankton . L imnol- Moraczewski , J. ( 1970 ) Etudes radioautographiques sur
ogy and Oceanography , 39 , 1044 – 1060 . l ’ amibe Arcella . Septi è me Congr è s International de Microscopie
Montagnes , D.J.S. , Berger , J.D. & Taylor , F.J.R. ( 1996 ) Growth É lectronique , Grenoble , 405 – 406 .
rate of the marine planktonic ciliate S trombidinopsis cheshiri Moraczewski , J. ( 1971a ) La composition chimique de la coque
Snyder and Ohman as a function of food concentration and d ’Arcella discoides Ehrbg . A cta Protozoologica , 8 , 407 –
interclonal variability . Journal of Experimental Marine 421 + Plate 1.
Biology and Ecology , 206 , 121 – 132 . Moraczewski , J. ( 1971b ) Structure et formation de la coque
Montagnes , D.J.S. , Wilson , D. , Brooks , S.J. , Lowe , C. & Campey , d ’Arcella . Acta Protozoologica , 8 , 423 – 437 + Plates 1 – 5 .
M. ( 2002a ) Cyclical behaviour of the tide - pool ciliate Mori , K. , Yamamoto , K. , Teruya , K. , et al. ( 2007 ) Endopara-
Strombidium oculatum . Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 28 , sitic dinofl agellate of the genus Ichthyodinium infecting
55 – 68 . fertilized eggs and hatched larvae observed in the seed pro-
Montagnes , D.J.S. , Lowe , C.D. , Poulton , A. & Jonsson , P.R. duction of leopard coral grouper P lectropomus leopardus .
( 2002b ) Redescription of Strombidium oculatum Gruber Fish Pathology , 42 , 49 – 57 .
1884 (Ciliophora, Oligotrichia) . J ournal of Eukaryotic Micro- Morote , E. , Olivar , M.P. , Pankhurst , P.M. , Villate , F. & Uriate , I.
biology , 49 , 329 – 337 . ( 2008a ) Trophic ecology of bullet tuna A uxis rochei larvae
Montagnes , D.J.S. , Kimmance , S.A. & Atkinson , D. ( 2003 ) and ontogeny of feeding - related organs . Marine Ecology
Using Q10: Can growth rates increase linearly with tem- Progress Series , 353 , 243 – 254 .
perature? Aquatic Micobial Ecology , 32 , 307 – 313 . Morote , E. , Olivar , M.P. , Villate , F. & Uriate , I. ( 2008b ) Diet of
Montagnes , D.J.S. , Barbosa , A.B. , Boenigk , J. , Davidson , K. , round sardinella, Sardinella aurita , larvae in relation to
J ü rgens , K. , Macek , M. , Parry , J. , Roberts , E.C. & Simek , K. plankton availability in the NW Mediterranean . J ournal of
( 2008a ) Selective feeding behaviour of free - living protists: Plankton Research , 30 , 807 – 816 .
avenues for continued study . Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 5 3 , Morote , E. , Olivar , M.P. , Villate , F. & Uriate , I. ( 2010 ) Compari-
83 – 98 . son of anchovy (E ngraulis encrasicolus ) and sardine (S ardina
Montagnes , D.J.S. , Chambouvet , A. , Guillou , L. & Fenton , A. pilchardus ) larvae feeding in the Northwest Medierranean:
( 2008b ) R esponsibility of microzooplankton and parasite infl uence of prey availability and ontogeny . ICES Jornal of
pressure be responsible for the demise of toxic dinofl agellate Marine Science , 67 , 879 – 908 .
blooms . Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 53 , 211 – 225 . M ü ller , H. ( 1996 ) Encystment of the freshwater ciliate
Montagnes , D.J.S. , Dower , J.F. & Figueiredo , G.M. ( 2010 ) The Pelagostrombidium fallax (Ciliophora, Oligotrichida) in
protozooplankton – ichthyoplankton trophic link: an over- laboratory culture . Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 11 , 289 –
looked aspect of aquatic food webs . Journal of Eukaryotic 295 .
Microbiology , 57 , 223 – 228 . M ü ller , H. ( 2002) Laboratory study of the life cycle of a fresh-
Montagnes , D.J.S. , Lowe , C.D. , Roberts , E.C. , Breckels , M.N. , water strombidiid ciliate . A quatic Microbial Ecology , 2 9 ,
Boakes , D.E. , Davidson , K. , Keeling , P.J. , Slamovits , C.H. , 189 – 197 .
Steinke , M. , Yang , Z. & Watts , P.C. ( 2011 ) An introduction M ü ller , H. & W ü nsch , C. ( 1999 ) Seasonal dynamics of cyst
to the special issue: Oxyrrhis marina , a model organism? formation of pelagic strombidiid ciliates in a deep prealpine
Journal of Plankton Research , 33 , 549 – 554 . lake . Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 17 , 37 – 47 .
Montagnes , D.J.S. , Roberts , E. , Lukes , J. & Lowe , C. ( 2012 ) The M ü ller , H. , Stadler , P. & Weisse , T. ( 2002 ) Seasonal dynamics of
rise of model protozoa . Trends in Microbiology , 20 , 184 – cyst formation of strombidiid ciliates in alpine Lake Mondsee,
191 . Austria . Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 29 , 181 – 188 .
Montani , S. , Ichimi , K. , Meksumpun , S. & Okaichi , T. ( 1995 ) M ü ller , O.F. ( 1776 ) Zoologiae Danicae prodromus, seu animalium
The effects of dissolved oxygen and sulfi de on germination Daniae et Norvegiae indigenarum characteres, nomina, et syn-
of the cysts of some different phytofl agellates. In Harmful onyma imprimis popularium . Hallageriis, Havniae.
Marine Algal Blooms ( P. Lassus , G. Arzul , E. Erard , M ü ller , O.F. ( 1779 ) Z oologia danica seu animalium Daniae et
P. Gentien and C. Marcaillou eds), pp. 627 – 632 , Lavoisier , Norvegiae rariorum ac minus notorum descriptiones et historia
Paris . 1 . Weygandinis, Havniae et Lipsiae.
* Monti , M. & Umani , S.F. ( 1995 ) Tintinnids in Terra Nova Bay Munn , C.B. ( 2006 ) Viruses as pathogens of marine organisms
– Ross Sea during two austral summers (1987/88 and from bacteria to whales . J ournal of the Marine Biological
1989/90) . A cta Protozoologica , 34 , 193 – 201 . Association of the United Kingdom , 86 , 453 – 467 .

274 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
* Murdoch , R.C. ( 1990 ) Diet of hoki larvae (M acruronus Nazarov , B.B. ( 1973 ) Radiolaria from Lower Cambrian hori-
novaezelandiae ) off Westland, New Zealand. N ew Zealand zons . T rudi Instituta Geologii (Akademia Nauk USSR) , 49 ,
Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research , 24 , 519 – 527 . 5 – 13 .
Murray , J.W. & Taylor , F.J.R. ( 1965 ) Early calpionellids from Nejstgaard , J.C. , Naustvoll , L.J. & Sazhin , A. ( 2001 ) Correcting
the Upper Devonian of western Canada, with a note on for underestimation of microzooplankton grazing in bottle
pyrite inclusions : B ulletin Canadian Petroleum Geology , 13 , incubation experiments with mesozooplankton . M arine
327 – 334 . Ecology Progress Series , 221 , 59 – 75 .
Murray , S. , J ø rgensen , M.F. , Ho , S.Y.W. , Patterson , D.J. & Nejstgaard , J.C. , Frischer , M.E. , Simonelli , P. , Troedsson , C. ,
Jermlin , L.S. ( 2005 ) Improving the analysis of dinofl agel- Brkel , M. , Adiyaman , F. , Sazhin , A.F. & Artigas , L.F. ( 2008 )
late phylogeny based on rDNA . P rotist , 156 , 269 – 286 . Quantitative PCR to estimate copepod feeding . M arine
Nagano , N. and Uye , S. ( 2002 ) Seasonal variations in abun- Biology , 153 , 565 – 577 .
dance, biomass, in situ growth rate and production of tin- Neuer , S. & Cowles , T.J. ( 1995 ) Comparative size - specifi c
tinnid ciliates in Kure Port, the Inland Sea of Japan . B ulletin grazing rates in fi eld populations of ciliates and dinofl agel-
of the Society of Sea Water Science , 56 , 142 – 149 . lates . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 125 , 259 – 267 .
Nagano , N. , Iwatsuki , Y. , Kamiyama , T. & Nakata , H. ( 2000 ) * Neumann - Leitao , S. , Paranagu á , M.N. & Valentin , J.L. ( 1992 )
Effects of marine ciliates on survivability of the fi rst - feeding The planktonic rotifers of the estuarine lagunar complex of
larval surgeonfi sh, Paracanthurus hepatus : laboratory Suape (Pernambuco, Brazil) . H ydrobiologia , 232 , 133 – 143 .
rearing experiments . H ydrobiologia , 432 , 149 – 157 . Nichols , R. ( 2001 ) Gene trees and species trees are not the
Nagano , N. , Iwatsuki , Y. , Okazaki , Y. & Nakata , H. ( 2001 ) same . Trends in Ecology and Evolution , 16 , 358 – 364 .
Feeding strategy of Japanese sand lance larvae in relation Nie , D. ( 1934 ) Notes on Tintinnoinea from the Bay of Amoy .
to ciliated protozoa in the vicinity of a thermohaline front . Annual Report of the Marine Biology Association of China , 3 ,
Journal of Oceanography , 57 , 155 – 163 . 71 – 80 .
* Naidu , W.D. ( 1983 ) Tintinnida (Protozoa: Ciliata) – a vital Nielsen , T.G. & Kiorboe , T. ( 1994 ) Regulation of zooplankton
link in the estuarine food web . Mahasagar – Bulletin of the biomass and production in a temperate, coastal ecosys-
National Institute of Oceanograph , 16 , 403 – 407 . tem. 2. Ciliates . Limnology and Oceanography , 39 , 508 –
* Naidu , W.D. & Krishnamurthy , K. ( 1985 ) Biogeographical 519 .
distribution of tintinnids (Protozoa: Ciliata) from Porto Nishibe , Y. , Kobari , T. & Ota , T. ( 2010 ) Feeding by the cyclo-
Novo waters . M ahasagar – Bulletin of the National Institute poid copepodOithona similis on the microplankton assem-
of Oceanography , 18 , 417 – 423 . blage in the Oyashio region during spring . P lankton Benthos
Nakagawa , Y. , Endo , Y. & Taki , K. ( 2001 ) Diet of E uphausia Research , 5 , 74 – 78 .
pacifi ca Hansen in Sanriku waters off northeastern Japan . Nomura , H. , Ishimaru , T. & Murano , M. ( 1992 ) Microzoo-
Plankton Biology Ecology , 48 , 68 – 77 . plankton assemblage and its seasonal variation in Tokyo
Nakagawa , Y. , O ta , T. , Endo , Y. , Taki , K. & Sugisaki , H. ( 2004 ). Bay . La Mer, Tokyo 30 , 57 – 72 .
Importance of ciliates as prey of the euphausiid Euphausia Noren , F. , Moestrup , Ø . & Rehnstam - Holm , A.S. ( 1999 ) P ar-
pacifi ca in the NW North Pacifi c . Marine Ecology Progress vilucifera infectans gen.et sp. nov. (Perkinsozoa phylum nov.):
Series , 271 , 261 – 266 . a parasitic fl agellate capable of killing toxic algae . E uropean
Nakamachi , M. & Iwasaki , N. ( 1998 ) List of tintinnids (Pro- Journal of Protistology , 35 , 233 – 254 .
tozoa: Ciliata) in Uranouchi Inlet, Kochi, Japan . B ulletin * Ogilvie , H.S. ( 1923 ) Microplankton from the south coast of
of Marine Sciences and Fisheries, Kochi University, 1 8 , Ireland . Rapports et Process - Verbaux R é union de la Conseil
65 – 76 . International pour Exploration de la Mer , 29 , 30 – 71 .
Nakamura , T. & Matsusaka , T. ( 1991 ) Effects of cyst age on * Ogilvie , H.S. ( 1938 ) The food of post - larval Haddock with
excystment of the ciliate Histriculus cavicola (Kahl, 1935) reference to the annual fl uctuations in the Haddock broods .
(Ciliophora: Stichotrichia) . E uropean Journal of Protistology , Rapports et Process - Verbaux R é union de la Conseil Interna-
27 , 375 – 380 . tional pour Exploration de la Mer , 107 , 57 – 66 .
Nakamura , Y. & Hirata , A. ( 2006 ) Plankton community Ohman , M.D. & Runge , J.A. ( 1994 ) Sustained fecundity when
structure and trophic interactions in a shallow and phytoplankton resources are in short supply: omnivory by
eutrophic estuarine system, Ariake Sound, Japan . A quatic Calanus fi nmarchicus in the Gulf of St. Lawrence . Limnology
Microbial Ecology , 44 , 45 – 57 . and Oceanography , 39 , 21 – 36 .
Nakane , T. , Nakaka , K. , Bouman H. & Platt , T. ( 2008 ) Envi- Ohman , M.D. , Theilacker , G.H. & Kaupp , S.E. ( 1991 ) Immu-
ronmental control of short - term variation in the plankton nochemical detection of predation on ciliate protists by
community of inner Tokyo Bay, Japan . Estuarine, Coastal larvae of the northern anchovy (E ngraulis mordax ) . Biologi-
and Shelf Science , 78 , 796 – 810 . cal Bulletin , 181 , 500 – 504 .
* Nakashima , J. & Kimoto , K. ( 1987 ) Comparison of the two Olesen , N.J. , Purcell , J.E. & Stoecker , D.K. ( 1996 ) Feeding and
counting methods for microzooplankton . B ulletin of the growth by ephyrae of scyphomedusae Chrysaora quin-
Seikai Regional Fishery Research Laboratory , 64 , 77 – 82 . quecirrha . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 137 , 149 – 159 .

References 275
Olson , M.B. & Strom , S.L. ( 2002 ) Phytoplankton growth, Foraminiferos e Radiolarios . M ems Inst. Invest. cient.
microzooplankton herbivory and community structure in Motamb. , 10 , 109 – 123 .
the southeast Bering Sea: insight into the formation and Parfrey , L.W. , Lahr , D.J.G. , Knoll , A.H. & Katz , L.A. ( 2011 )
temporal persistence of an E miliania huxleyi bloom . D eep - Estimating the timing of early eukarotic diversifi cation
Sea Research II , 49 , 5969 – 5990 . with mutigene molecular clocks . P roceedings of the National
Olson , M.B. , Lessard , E.J. , Wong , C.W.J. & Bernhardt , M.J. Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 1 08 ,
( 2006 ) Copepod feeding selectivity on microplankton, 13624 – 13629 .
including the toxigenic diatoms P seudo - nitzschia spp., in the Park , G.S. & Marshall , H.G. ( 2000 ) The trophic contributions
coastal Pacifi c Northwest . Marine Ecology Progress Series , of rotifers in tidal freshwater and estuarine habitats . E stua-
326 , 207 – 220 . rine , Coastal and Shelf Science , 51 , 729 – 742 .
Omori , M. ( 1974 ) The biology of pelagic shrimps in the ocean . Park , M.G. , Yih , W. & Coats , D.W. ( 2004 ) Parasites and phyto-
Advances in Marine Biology , 12 , 233 – 324 . plankton, with special emphasis on dinofl agellate infec-
* Osorio - Tafall , B.F. ( 1941 ) Tintinnidos nuevos o poco conoci- tions . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 51 , 145 – 155 .
dos del plancton neritico de Mexico . R evista de la Sociedad Parrow , M.W. & Burkholder , J.M. ( 2003 ) Reproduction and
Mexicana de Historia Natural , 2 , 147 – 173 . sexuality in Pfi esteria shumwayae (Dinophyceae) . Journal of
* Ostenfeld , C.H. & Schmidt , J. ( 1902 ) Plankton fra det Rode Phycology , 39 , 697 – 711 .
Hav og Adenbugten . Videnskabelige Meddelelser den Passow , U. & Peinert , R. ( 1993 ) The role of plankton in parti-
naturhistoriske Forening i Kjobenhavn for 1901 , 141 – cle fl ux: two case studies from the northeast Atlantic. Deep -
182 . Sea Research II , 40 , 573 – 585 .
Ota , T. & Taniguchi , A. ( 2003 ) Conjugation in the marine Paulmier , G. ( 1997 ) Tintinnides (Ciliophora, Oligotrichida, Tin-
aloricate oligotrich P elagostrobilidium (Ciliophora: Oligo- tinnina) de l ’ Atlantique Bor é al, de l ’ Oc é an Indien et quelques
trichia) . E uropean Journal of Protistology , 39 , 149 – 160 . mers adjactentes: M éd iterran ée , Mer Caraibe, Mer Rouge .
Pace , M.L. , Findlay , S.E. & Fischer , D. ( 1998 ) Effects of an Inventaire et distribution. Observations bas é e sur les loricas.
invasive bivalve on the zooplankton community of the Rapport IFREMER DRV/RH/97 - 17, Brest, France.
Hudson River. F reshwater Biology , 39 , 103 – 116 . Pearcy , W.G. ( 1962 ) Ecology of an estuarine population of
Pace , M.L. , Glasser , E.J. & Pomeroy , L.R. ( 1984 ) A simulation winter fl ounder, P seudopleuronectes americanus (Walbaum) .
analysis of continental shelf food webs . Marine Biology , 82 , Bulletin of the Bingham Oceanographic Collection , 18 , 1 –
47 – 63 . 78 .
Paiva , T.S. , Borges , B.N. , Harada , M.L. & Silva - Neto , I.D. Pearre , S. Jr ( 1973 ) Vertical migration and feeding in S agitta
( 2009 ) Comparative phylogenetic study of S tichotrichia elegans Verrill . E cology , 54 , 300 – 314 .
(Alveolata: Ciliophora: Spirotrichea) based on 18S - rDNA Pearre , S. Jr ( 1981 ) Feeding by chaetognatha – energy
sequences . Genetics and Molecular Research , 8 , 223 – 246 . balance and importance of various components of the
Paivinen , J. , Grappuo , A. , Kaitala , V. , Komonen , A. , Kotiaho , diet of Sagitta elegans . Marine Ecology Progress Series ,
J.S. , Saarinen , K. & Wahlberg , N. ( 2005 ) Negative 5 , 46 – 54 .
density – distribution relationship in butterfl ies . B MC Pedersen , M.F. & Hansen , P.J. ( 2003 ) Effects of high pH on the
Biology , 3 , 5 . growth and survival of six marine heterotrophic protists .
Paranjape , M.A. ( 1968 ) The egg mass and veligers of L imacina Marine Ecology Progress Series , 260 , 33 – 41 .
helicina . Veliger , 10 , 322 – 326 . Perez - Ruzafa , A. , Gilabert , J. , Gutierrez , J.M. , Fernandez , A.I. ,
* Paranjape , M.A. ( 1980 ) Occurrence and signifi cance of Marcos , C. & Sabah , S. ( 2002 ) Evidence of a planktonic
resting cysts in a hyaline tintinnid, Helicostomella subulata food web response to changes in nutrient input dynamics
(Ehre.) Jorgensen . Journal of Experimental Marine Biology in the Mar Menor coastal lagoon, Spain . Hydrobiologia ,
and Ecology , 48 , 23 – 33 . 475/476 , 359 – 369 .
* Paranjape , M.A. ( 1987a ) Grazing by microzooplankton in Persson , A. & Smith , B.C. ( 2009 ) Grazing on a natural
the eastern Canadian arctic in summer 1983 . M arine assempblage of ciliate and dinofl agellate cysts by the
Ecology Progress Series , 40 , 239 – 246 . eastern oyster Crasostrea virginica . Aquatic Biology , 6 ,
* Paranjape , M.A. ( 1987b ) The seasonal cycles and vertical 227 – 233 .
distribution of tintinnines in Bedford Basin, Nova Scotia, Petran , A. ( 1958 ) Contributii la cunoasterea speciilor de Tin-
Canada . Canadian Journal of Zoology , 65 , 41 – 48 . tinnoidee din dreptul litoralului Rominesc al Marrii Negre .
* Paranjape , M.A. , Conover , R.J. , Harding , G.C. & Prouse , N.J. Hidrobiolgia , 1 , 75 – 88 .
( 1985 ) Micro - and macrozooplankton on the Nova Scotian Petz , W. & Foissner , W. ( 1992 ) Morphology and morphogen-
Shelf in the prespring bloom period: A comparison of their esis of Strobilidium caudatum (Fromentel), M eseres corlissi
potential resource utilization . Canadian Journal of Fisheries n. sp., H alteria grandinella (M ü ller), and S trombidium rehwaldi
and Aquatic Science , 42 , 1484 – 1492 . n. sp., and a proposed phylogenetic system for oligotrich
* Paredes , J.F. ( 1969 – 1970 ) Subsidios para o conhecimento ciliates (Protozoa, Ciliophora) . J ournal of Protozoology 39 ,
do plancton marinho de Cabo Verde. II – Tintinideos, 159 – 176 .

276 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Petz , W. & Foissner , W. ( 1993 ) Morphogenesis in some fresh- Pomeroy , L.R. & Wiebe , W.J. ( 1988 ) Energetics of microbial
water tintinnids (Ciliophora, Oligotrichida). E uropean food webs . Hydrobiologia , 159 , 7 – 18 .
Journal of Protistology , 29 , 106 – 120 . Pop , G. ( 1976 ) Tithonian - Valanginian calpionellid zones from
Petz , W. , Song , W. & Wilbert , N. ( 1995 ) Taxonomy and ecology Cuba . Dari de Seama ale Sedintelor, Institutul de Geologie si
of the ciliate fauna (Protozoa, Ciliophora) in the endopagial Geofi zica (3. Paleontologie) , 62 , 237 – 266 .
and pelagial of the Weddell Sea, Antarctica . Stapfi a , 40 , Porter , S. ( 2011 ) The rise of predators . G eology , 39 ,
1 – 223 . 607 – 608 .
Peulv é , S. , De Leeuw , J.W. , Sicre , M. - A. , Baas , M. & Saliot , A. * Posta , A. ( 1963 ) Relation entre l ’ evolution de quelques tin-
( 1996 ) Characterization of macromolecular organic tinnides de la rade de Villefranche et la temp é rature de
matter in sediment traps from the northwestern Mediter- l ’ eau . Cahiers de Biologie Marine , 4 , 201 – 210 .
ranean Sea . G eochimica et Cosmochimica Acta , 60 , 1239 – * Prasad , R.R. ( 1956 ) Further studies on the plankton of the
1259 . inshore waters off Mandapam. Indian Journal of Fisheries ,
Pfi ester , L.A. & Anderson , D.M. ( 1987 ) Dinofl agellate life 3 , 1 – 42 .
cycles and their environmental control. In The Biology of Price , A.M. & Pospelova , V. ( 2011 ) High - resolution sediment
Dinofl agellates ( Taylor , F.J.R. ed.), pp. 611 – 648 , Blackwell , trap study of organic - walled dinofl agellate cyst production
Oxford . and biogenic silica fl ux in Saanich Inlet (BC, Canada) .
Pierce , R.W. & Turner , J.T. ( 1992 ) Ecology of planktonic cili- Marine Micropaleontology , 80 , 18 – 43 .
ates in marine food webs . Reviews in Aquatic Sciences , 6 , Probyn , T.A. ( 1987 ) Ammonium regeneration by micro-
139 – 181 . plankton in an upwelling environment . Marine Ecology
Pierce , R.W. & Turner , J.T. ( 1993 ) Global biogeography of Progress Series , 37 , 64 .
marine tintinnids . M arine Ecology Progress Series , 94 , Purcell . E.M. ( 1977 ) Life at low Reynolds number . A merican
11 – 26 . Journal of Physics , 45 , 3 – 11 .
* Pierce , R.W. & Turner , J.T. ( 1994 ) Plankton studies in Buz- Puri , H.S. ( 1953 ) Taxonomic Comment on: “ Ostracoda from
zards Bay, Massachusetts, USA. IV. Tintinnids, 1987 to Wells in North Carolina Part I: Cenozoic Ostracoda ” by
1988 . M arine Ecology Progress Series , 112 , 235 – 240 . F. M. Swain . J ournal of Paleontology , 27 , 750 – 752 .
Pierce , R.W. , Carlton , J.T. , Carlton , D.A. & Geller , J.B. ( 1997 ) Quinlan , E. , Jett , C. & Phlips , E. ( 2009 ) Microzooplankton
Ballast water as a vector for tintinnid transport . M arine grazing and the control of phytoplankton biomass in the
Ecology Progress Series , 149 , 295 – 297 . Suwannee River estuary, USA . H ydrobiologia , 6 32 , 127 –
Pierce , S. , Kossoy , V. , Valenti , R. & Smetana , D.G. ( 1968 ) Cyto- 137 .
chemical studies on the test of A llogromia laticollare . M icro- Raikov , I.B. ( 1982 ) T he Protozoan Nucleus, Morphology and
paleontology , 14 , 242 – 246 . Evolution . Cell Biology Monographs 9 . Springer Verlag ,
Pinheiro , M.D.O. , Power , M.E. , Butler , B.J. , Dayeh , V.R. , Vienna, Austria .
Slawson , R. , Lee , L.E.J. , Lynn , D.H. & Bols , N.C. ( 2007 ) Use * Rampi , L. ( 1948 ) I tintinnoidi delle acque di San Remo . B ol-
of Tetrahymena thermophila to study the role of protozoa in letin di Pesca, di Piscicultura e di Idrobiologia , 3 , 50 – 56 .
inactivation of viruses in water. A pplied and Environmental * Rampi , L. ( 1950 ) I tintinnoidi delle acque di Monaco raccolti
Microbiology , 73 , 643 – 649 . dall ’ Eider nell ’ anno 1913 . Bulletin de L ’ institut Oc é ano-
Pinheiro , M.D.O. , Power , M.E. , Butler , B.J. , Dayeh , V.R. , graphique, Monaco , 965 , 1 – 8 .
Slawson , R. , Lee , L.E.J. , Lynn , D.H. & Bols , N.C. ( 2008 ) Inac- Rampi , L. & Zattera , A. ( 1982 ) Chiave per la determinazione
tivation of the bacteriophage MS2 by the ciliated proto- dei Tintinnidi mediterranei . C omitato nazionale per la ricerca
zoan, Tetrahymena thermophila . Water Quality Research e per lo sviluppo dell ’ energia nucleare e delle energie alternative,
Journal Canada , 43 , 69 – 76 . ENEA - RT/BIO, (82) 28 , 1 – 104 .
Pitta , P. & Giannakourou , A. ( 2000 ) Planktonic ciliates in the Rassoulzadegan , F. ( 1975 ) Ecologie et Relations Trophiiques
oligotrophic Eastern Mediterranean: vertical, spatial distri- du Microzooplancton dans un Ecosyst è me N é rtique . Th è se
bution and mixotrophy . M arine Ecology Progress Series , Doctorale, Oc é anographie Biologique, Universit é Pierre et
194 , 269 – 282 . Marie Curies (Paris VI) , Paris, France .
Pitta , P. , Giannakourou , A. & Christaki , U. ( 2001 ) Planktonic Rassoulzadegan , F. ( 1977 ) Evolution annuelle des cilies pelag-
ciliates in the oligotrophic Mediterranean Sea: longitudinal iques en mediterranee nord - occidentale cilies oligotriches
trends of standing stocks, distributions and analysis of “ non tintinnides ” (oligotrichina) . Annales Institut Oc é ano-
food vacuole contents . A quatic Microbial Ecology , 24 , graphique, Paris , 53 , 125 – 134 .
297 – 311 . Rassoulzadegan , F. ( 1978 ) Dimensions et taux d ’ ingestion des
Platt , T. ( 1985 ) Structure of the marine ecosystem: its allom- particules consomm é es par un tintinnide: F avella ehren-
etric basis . C anadian Bulletin of Fisheries and Aquatic Science , bergii (Clap. & Lach.) J ö rg., cili é pelagique marine . Annales
213 , 55 – 64 . de l ’ Institute Oc é anographique, Paris , 54 , 17 – 24 .
Pomeroy , L.R. ( 1974 ) The ocean ’ s food web: a changing para- Rassouzadegan , F. ( 1979 ) Annual evolution of pelagic ciliates
digm . B ioscience , 24 , 499 – 504 . in the North - western Mediterranean sea, 2: Oligotrichous

References 277
ciliates. Tintinnids (Tintinnidae) . I nvestigacion Pesquera , 4 3 , Remane , J. , Bakalova - Ivanova , D. , Borza , K. , Knauer , J. , Nagy ,
417 – 448 . I. , Pop , G. & Tardi - Filacz , E. ( 1986 ) Agreement of the sub-
Rassoulzadegan , F. ( 1980 ) Granulometric analysis of the par- division of the standard Calpionellid - Zones defi ned at the
ticles used by a tintinnid S tenosemella ventricosa (Clap. & second Planktonic Conference, Roma 1970 . Acta Geologica
Lachm.) Jorg., during lorica building . P rotistologica , 16 , Hungarica , 29 , 5 – 13 .
507 – 510 . * Revelante , N. & Gilmartin , M. ( 1987 ) Seasonal cycle of the
Rassoulzadegan , F. & Etienne , M. ( 1981 ) Grazing rate of the ciliated protozoan and micrometazoan biomass in a Gulf
tintinnid Stenosemella ventricosa (Clap. & Lach.) J ö rg. of Maine estuary . E stuarine , Coastal and Shelf Science , 25 ,
on the spectrum of naturally occurring particulate matter 581 – 598 .
from Mediterranean neritic area . Limnology and Oceanogra- * Revelante , N. & Gilmartin , M. ( 1990 ) Vertical water column
phy , 26 , 258 – 270 . resource partitioning by a ciliated protozoan population
* Rassoulzadegan , F. , Laval - Peuto , M. & Sheldon , R.W. ( 1988 ) under stratifi ed conditions in the northern Adriatic . Journal
Partitioning of the food ration of marine ciliates between of Plankton Research , 12 , 89 – 107 .
pico - and nanoplankton . H ydrobiologia , 159 , 75 – 88 . Richards , T.A. & Bass , D. ( 2005 ) Molecular screening of free -
Raybaud , V. , Tunin - Ley , A. , Ritchie , M.E. , Dolan , J.R. ( 2009 ) living microbial eukaryotes: diversity and distribution
Similar patterns of community organization characterize using a met - analysis . C urrent Opinion in Microbiology , 8 ,
distinct groups of different trophic levels in the plankton 240 – 252 .
of the NW Mediterranean Sea . B iogeosciences , 6 , 431 – Rigby , S. & Milsom , C.Y. ( 2000 ) Origins, evolution and diver-
438 . sifi cation of zooplankton . A nnual Review of Ecology and Sys-
Reaugh , M.L. , Roman , M.R. & Stoecker , D.K. ( 2007 ) Changes tematics , 31 , 293 – 313 .
in plankton community structure and function in response Ris , H. & Kubai , D.F. ( 1974 ) An unusual mitotic mechanism
to variable freshwater fl ow in two tributaries of the Chesa- in the parasitic protozoan Syndinium sp . T he Journal of Cell
peake Bay . Estuaries and Coasts , 30 , 403 – 417 . Biology , 60 , 702 – 720 .
Reck , E.M. ( 1988 ) Lorica - splitting by the Tintinnina . N atur- Roberts , E.C. , Legrand , C. , Steinke , M. & Wootton , E.C. ( 2011 )
wissenschaften , 75 , 45 – 47 . Mechanisms underlying chemical interactions between
Redden , A.M. , Sanderson, B .G. & R issik , D. ( 2002 .) Extending predatory planktonic protists and their prey . J ournal of
the analysis of the dilution method to obtain the phyto- Plankton Research , 33 , 833 – 841 .
plankton concentration at which microzooplankton * Robertson , J.R. ( 1983 ) Predation by estuarine zooplankton
grazing becomes saturated . M arine Ecology Progress Series , on tintinnid ciliates . E stuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science , 16 ,
226 , 27 – 33 . 27 – 36 .
Reid , P.C. ( 1987 ) Mass encystment of a planktonic oligotrich * Rogers , G.F. , Roff , J.C. & Lynn , D.H. ( 1981 ) Tintinnids of
ciliate . Marine Biology , 95 , 221 – 230 . Chesterfi eld Inlet, Northwest Territories . C anadian Journal of
* Reid , P.C. & John , A.W.G. ( 1978 ) Tintinnid cysts . J ournal of Zoology , 59 , 2360 – 2364 .
the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom , 5 8 , Roja de Mendiola , B. ( 1974 ) Food of the larval anchoveta
551 – 557 + Plate 1. Engraulis ringens J . In The Early Life History of Fish ( J.H.S.
Reid , P.C. & John , A.W.G. ( 1983 ) Resting cysts in the Blaxter ed.), pp. 277 – 285 , Springer - Verlag , Berlin .
ciliate class Polyhymenophorea: phylogenetic implications . Rollwagen Bollens , G.C.R. & Penry , D. ( 2003 ) Feeding dynam-
Journal of Protozoology , 30 , 710 – 713 . ics of A cartia spp. copepods in a large, temperate estuary
Remane , J. ( 1963 ) Les Calpionelles dans les couches de (San Francisco Bay, CA) . M arine Ecology Progress Series ,
passage jurassique - cr é tac é de la fosse vocontienne . Travaux 257 , 139 – 158 .
du Laboratoire de G é ologie de la Facult é des Sciences de la Uni- Roman , M.R. & Rublee , P.A. ( 1981 ) A method to determine in
versit é de Grenoble , 39 , 25 – 82 . situ zooplankton grazing rates on natural particle assem-
Remane , J. ( 1964 ) Untersuchungen zur Systematik und blages . Marine Biology 65 , 303 – 309 .
Stratigraphie der Calpionellen in den Jura - Kreide - Rombouts , I. , Beaugrand , G. , Ibanez , F. , Gasparini , S. , Chiba ,
Grenzchichten des Vocontischen Troges . P alaeontographica S. & Legendre , L. ( 2009 ) Global latitudinal variations in
A , 123 , 1 – 57 . marine copepod diversity and environmental factors . Pro-
Remane , J. ( 1971 ) Les Calpionelles protozoaires plankto- ceedings of the Royal Society B , 267 , 293 – 299 .
niques des mers mesog é ennes de l ’ é poque secondaire . Rombouts , I. , Beaugrand , G. , Ibanez , F. , Gasparini , S. , Chiba ,
Annales Guebhard Neuchatel , 47 , 370 – 393 . S. & Legendre , L. ( 2010 ) A multivariate approach to large -
Remane , J. ( 1985 ) Calpionellids . P lankton Statigraphy ( Bolli , scale variation in marine planktonic copepod diversity and
H.M. , Saunders , J.B. , Perch - Nielsen , K. eds), pp. 555 – 572 , its environmental correlates . Limnology and Oceanography ,
Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . 55 , 2219 – 2229 .
Remane , J. ( 1998 ) Calpionellids . Introduction to Marine Micro- Roncaglia , L. ( 2004 ) Palynofacies analysis and organic -
paleontology 2nd Ed. ( Haq , B.U. , Boersma , A. eds), pp. 161 – walled dinofl agellate cysts as indicators of palaeo - hydro-
170 . Elsevier, Amsterdam . graphic changes: an example from Holocene sediments in

278 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Skalafjord, Faroe Islands . Marine Micropaleontology , 50 , Saldarriaga , J.F. , McEwan , M.L. , Fast , N.M. , Taylor , F.J.R. &
21 – 42 . Keeling , P.J. ( 2003 ) Multiple protein phylogenies show that
Rosati , G. & Modeo , L. ( 2003 ) Extrusomes in ciliates: diversi- Oxyrrhis marina and P erkinsus marinus are early branches
fi cation, distribution, and phylogenetic implications . J ournal of the dinofl agellate lineage . I nternational Journal of System-
of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 50 , 383 – 402 . atic and Evolutionary Microbiology , 53 , 355 – 365 .
Rosetta , C.H. & McManus , G.B. ( 2003 ) Feeding by ciliates Salomon , P.S. , Janson , S. & G ran él i , E. ( 2003 ) Multiple species
on two harmful algal bloom species, P rymnesium parvum of the dinophagous dinofl agellate genus Amoebophrya
and Prorocentrum minimum . Harmful Algae , 2 , 109 – infect the same host species . E nvironmental Microbiology , 5 ,
126 . 1046 – 1052 .
Rougier , C. , Pourriot , R. , Lam - Hoai , T. & Guiral , D. ( 2005 ) Salvano , P. ( 1974 ) Analyse microspectrographique dans
Ecological patterns of the rotifer communities in the Kaw l ’ ultraviolet du macronoyau de Strombidium sulcatum Clap.
River estuary (French Guiana) . Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf et L., 1859 (Cilié Hypotriche), pendant l ’i ntercin ès e .
Science , 63 , 83 – 91 . Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des Seances de l ’ Academie des
* Roxas , H.A. ( 1941 ) Marine protozoa of the Philippines . Phil- Sciences Paris, S é rie D , 278 , 2445 – 2447 .
ippine Journal of Science , 74 , 91 – 139 . Salvano , P. ( 1975 ) Comparaison du fonctionnement des
Rublee , P.A. & Gallegos , C.L. ( 1989 ) Use of fl uorescently bandes de r é organisation d ’ Euplotes crassus (Dujardin) et
labelled algae (FLA) to estimate microzooplankton grazing . deStrombidium sulcatum Clapar è de et Linn é apr è s analyse
Marine Ecology Progress Series , 51 , 221 – 227 . microspectrographique en UV . J ournal of Protozoology , 22 ,
Rudstam , L.G. , Danielsson , K. , Hansson , S. & Johnsson , S. 230 – 232 .
( 1989 ) Diel vertical migration and feeding patterns of Sanchez , N. , Gonz á lez , H.E. & Iriate , J.L. ( 2011 ) Trophic inter-
Mysis - mixta (Crustacea, Mysidacea) in the Baltic Sea . actions of pelagic crustaceans in Comau Fjord (Chile): their
Marine Biology , 101 , 43 – 52 . role in the food web structure . Journal of Plankton Research ,
R ü st , D. ( 1885 ) Beitr ä ge zur Kenntniss der fossilen Radioler- 33 , 1212 – 1229 .
ien aus Gesteinen de Jura . Palaeontographica , 11 , 273 – * Sanders , R.W. ( 1987 ) Tintinnids and other microzooplank-
321 . ton – seasonal distributions and relationships to resources
Rutherford , S. , D ’ Hondt , S. & Prell , W. ( 1999 ) Environmental and hydrography in a Maine estuary . Journal of Plankton
controls on the geographic distribution of zooplankton Research , 9 , 65 – 77 .
diversity . N ature , 400 , 749 – 753 . Sanders , R.W. & Wickham , S.A. ( 1993 ) Planktonic protozoa
Rutman , J. & Fishelson , L. ( 1969 ) Food composition and and metazoa: predation, food quality and population
feeding behavior of shallow - water crinoids at Eilat (Red control . Marine Microbial Food Webs , 7 , 197 – 223 .
Sea) . Marine Biology , 3 , 46 – 57 . Santoferrara , L.F. & Alder , V. ( 2009 ) Abundance trends
Ryazanova , T.V. , Eliselkina , M.G. , Kukhlevsky , A.D. & Khar- and ecology of planktonic ciliates of the south - western
lamenko , V.I. ( 2010 ) Hematodinium sp. infection of red Atlantic (35 - 63o S): a comparison between neritic and
Paralithodes camtschaticus and blue P aralithodes platypus oceanic environments . J ournal of Plankton Research , 31 ,
king crabs from the Sea of Okhotsk, Russia . Journal of Inver- 837 – 851 .
tebrate Pathology , 105 , 329 – 334 . * Santoferrara , L.F. & Alder , V.A. ( 2009a ) Morphological vari-
Ryther , J.H. ( 1969 ) Photosynthesis and fi sh production in the ability, spatial distribution and abundance of H elicostomella
sea . Science , 166 , 72 – 76 . species (Ciliophora: Tintinnina) in relation to environmen-
Sacc à , A. , Guglielmo , L. & Bruni , V. ( 2008 ) Vertical and tem- tal factors (Argentine shelf; 40 – 55 ° S) . Scientia Marina , 7 3 ,
poral microbial community patterns in a meromictic 701 – 716 .
coastal lake infl uenced by the Straits of Messina upwelling Santoferrara , L.F. & Alder , V.A. ( 2012 ) Abundance and diver-
system . Hydrobiologia , 600 , 89 – 104 . sity of tintinnids planktonic ciliates) under contrasting
Sacc à , A. , St ü der - Kype , M.C. & Lynn , D.H. ( 2012 ) Redescrip- levels of productivity in the Argentine Shelf and Drake
tion of R hizodomus tagatzi (Ciliophora: Spirotrichea: Tintin- Passage . Journal of Sea Research , 71 , 25 – 30 .
nida), Based on morphology, ciliary pattern and small Santoferrara , L.F. , G ó mez , M.I. & Alder , V.A. ( 2011 ) Bathy-
subunit ribosomal RNA. gene sequence. J ournal of Eukaryo- metric, latitudinal and vertical distribution of protozoo-
tic Microbiology , 59 , 218 – 231 . plankton in a cold - temperate shelf (southern Patagonian
Sakka Hlaili , A. , Grami , B. , Hadj Mabrouk , H. , Gosselin , M. & watres) during winter . Journal of Plankton Research , 33 ,
Hamel , D. ( 2007 ) Phytoplankton growth and microzoo- 457 – 468 .
plankton grazing rates in a restricted Mediterranean lagoon Santoferrara , L.F. , McManus , G.B. & Alder , V.A. ( 2012a )
(Bizerte Lagoon, Tunisia) . M arine Biology , 151 , 767 – 783 . Utility of genetic markers and morphology for species dis-
Saldarriaga , J.F. , Taylor , F.J.R. , Keeling , P.J. & Cavalier - Smith , crimination within the order Tintinnida (Ciliophora, Spiro-
T. ( 2001 ) Dinofl agellate nuclear SSU rRNA phylogeny sug- trichea) . Protist , 163 , in press.
gests multiple plastid losses and replacements . J ournal Santoferrara L. , McManus G. & Alder V. ( 2012b ) Phylogeny
Molecular Evolution , 53 , 204 – 213 . of the order Tintinnida (Ciliophora, Spirotrichea) inferred

References 279
from small and large subunit rRNA genes . J ournal of Eukary- Schopf , J.W. ( 2001 ) Cradle of Life: the discovery of Earth ’ s earli-
otic Microbiology , 59 , in press. est fossils . Princeton University Press , Princeton, USA .
Sarnelle , O. ( 1997 ) D aphnia effects on microzooplankton: Schrank , F.P. ( 1803 ) Fauna Boica: durchgedachte Geschichte der
comparisons of enclosure and whole lake responses . in Baiern einheimschen und zahmen. Band 3b: Arbtheilung 2.
Ecology , 78 , 913 – 928 . Schuster , B. & Sleytr , U.B. ( 2000 ) S - layer - supported lipid mem-
* Sassi , R. & Melo , G.D.N. ( 1986 ) Tintinnina (Protozoa – branes . Reviews in Molecular Biotechnology , 74 , 233 – 254 .
Ciliophora – Oligotrichida) from the First Brazilian Expedi- * Schwamborn , R. , Ekau , W. , Silva , A.P. , Schwamborn , S.H.L. ,
tion to the Antarctic . A nais Acad. Bras. Cienc. , 58 , 63 – Silva , T.A. , Neumann - Leita , S. & Saint - Paul , U. ( 2006 )
84 . Ingestion of large centric diatoms, mangrove detritus, and
* Sassi , R. & Melo , G.N. ( 1989 ) Hyaline tintinnina (Protozoa zooplankton by zoeae of A ratus pisonii (Crustacea: Brachy-
– Ciliophora – Oligotrichida) from northeast Brazilian ura: Grapsidae). Hydrobiologia , 560 , 1 – 13 .
coastal reefs . Boletim del Instituto Oceanografi ca, San Paulo Schweyer , A. ( 1909 ) Zur Kenntnis des Tintinnodeen-
37 , 59 – 74 . weichk ö rpers, nebst einleitenden Worten ü ber die H ü lsen-
Sato , N.E. , Hernandez , D. & Vinas , M.D. ( 2010 ) Feeding habits struktur und die H ü lsenbildung . A rchiv f ü r Protistenkunde ,
of Noctiluca scintillans in coastal waters off Buenos Aires 18 , 134 – 189 + Plates 10, 11.
Province, Argentina . Latin American Journal of Aquatic Schweyer , A.W. ( 1905 ) Ueber den Bau und die Vermehrung
Research , 38 , 403 – 412 . der Tintinnoidae (inf. cil.) . T ravaux de la Soci é t é Imp é riale des
Saunders, G.W. , Hill , D.R.A. , Sexton , J.P. & Andersen , R.A. Naturalistes de St. P é tersbourg , 35 , 1 – 5 .
( 1997 ). Small - subunit ribosomal RNA sequences from * Scott , D.B. , Schell , T. , Rochon , A. & Blasco , S. ( 2008 ) Benthic
selected dinofl agellates: testing classical evolutionary foraminifera in the surface sediments of the Beaufort Shelf
hypotheses with molecular systematic methods . In Origins and slope, Beaufort Sea, Canada: Applications and implica-
of Algae and their Plastids ( D. Bhattacharya ed.), pp. 237 – tions for past sea - ice conditions . J ournal of Marine Systems ,
259 , Springer , Vienna . 74 , 840 – 863 .
Saville Kent , W. ( 1880 – 1882 ) A Manual of the Infusoria: Sellner , K.G. ( 1981 ) Primary productivity and the fl ux of dis-
Including a description of all known Flagellate, Ciliate, and Ten- solved organic matter in several marine environments .
taculiferous Protozoa, British and Foreign, and an Account of Marine Biology , 65 , 101 – 112 .
the Organization and Affi nities of the Sponges. David Bogue, Sellner , K.G. , Brownlee , D.C. , Bundy , M.H. , Brownlee , S.G. &
London. Braun , K.R. ( 1993 ) Zooplankton grazing in a Potomac
Schemske , D.W. , Mittelbach , G.G. , Cornell , H.V. , Sobel , J.M. & River cyanobacteria bloom . Estuaries and Coasts , 16 ,
Roy , K. ( 2009) Is there a latitudinal gradient in the impor- 859 – 872 .
tance of biotic interactions? A nnual Review of Ecology, Evo- Seuthe , L. , Rokkan Iversen , K. & Narcy , F. ( 2011 ) Microbial
lution and Systematics , 40 , 245 – 269 . processes in a high - latitude fjord (Kongsfjorden, Svalbard):
Schmidt , A.R. , von Eynatten , H. & Wagreich , M. ( 2001 ) The II. Ciliates and dinofl agellates . Polar Biology , 34 , 751 – 766 .
Mesozoic amber of Schliersee (southern Germany) is Cre- Shaheen , P.A. , Manderson , J.P. & Fahay , M.P. ( 2004 ) Stage -
taceous in age . C retaceous Research , 22 , 423 – 428 . specifi c spatial and temporal variability in the diets of larval
* Schmidt , J. ( 1902 ) Some Tintinnodea from the Gulf of Siam . winter fl ounder ( Pseudopleuronectes americanus ) in a North-
Videnskabelige Meddelelser den naturhistoriske Forening i eastern U.S. estuarine nursery . E stuaries , 27 , 958 – 965 .
Kjobenhavn for 1901 , 183 – 190 . Shalchian - Tabrizi , K. , Minge , M. , Cavalier - Smith , T. , Nedrek-
Schmidt - Nielsen , K. ( 1990 ) Animal Physiology: adaptation and lepp , J.M. , Klaveness , D. & Jakobsen , K.S. ( 2006 ) Combined
environment , 4th ed. Cambridge University Press , Cam- heat shock protein 90 and ribosomal RNA sequence phyl-
bridge, UK . ogeny supports multiple replacements of dinofl agellate
Schmitt , P.D. ( 1986 ) Feeding by larvae of H ypoatherina tropi- plastids . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 53 , 217 – 224 .
calis (Pisces: Atherinidae) and its relation to prey availabil- Sharaf , G.M. ( 1995 ) On Some Tintinnids (Protozoa: Ciliata)
ity in One Tree Lagoon, Great Barrier Reef, Australia. From The Strait Of Hormoz And The United Arab Emirates
Environmental Biology of Fishes , 16 , 79 – 94 . Waters . Qatar University Science Journal , 15 , 389 – 398 .
* Sch ö nberger , M. ( 1994 ) Planktonic ciliated protozoa of Sharp , J.H. ( 1977 ) Excretion of organic matter by marine phy-
Neusiedler See (Austria / Hungary) – a comparison between toplankton: do healthy cells do it? Limnology and Oceanogra-
the turbid open lake and a reedless brown- water pond. phy , 2 2 , 381 – 399 .
Marine Microbial Food Webs , 8 , 251 – 263 . Sherman , K. & Honey , K.A. ( 1971 ) Seasonal variations in the
Sch ö nborn , W. , D ö rfelt , H. , Foissner , W. , Krientiz , L. & Sch ä fer , food of larval herring in coastal waters of central Maine .
U. ( 1999 ) A fossilized microcenosis in Triassic amber . Rapports et Proces Verbaux R é union Consiel Internationale pou
Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 46 , 571 – 584 . l ’ Exploration de la Mer , 160 , 121 – 124 .
Sch ö nfeld , C. ( 1959 ). Ü ber das parasitische Verhalten einer Sherr , E. & Sherr , B. ( 1988 ). Role of microbes in pelagic food
Astasia - Art in S tentor coerulus . Archiv f ü r Protistenkunde , webs: a revised concept . L imnology and Oceanography , 33 ,
104 , 261 – 264 . 1225 – 1227 .

280 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Sherr , E. & Sherr , B. ( 2008a ) Understanding roles of microbes rubrum (Ciliophora) in thin layers in a coastal inlet . J ournal
in marine pelagic food webs: a brief history . In Microbial of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 58 , 365 – 372 .
Ecology of the Oceans , 2nd Ed ( D.L. Kirchman ed.), Wiley - Skovgaard , A. & Legrand, C . ( 2005 ) Observation of live speci-
Blackwell, Hoboken , NJ, USA . mens of Pseudotontonia cornuta (Ciliophora: Oligotrichida)
Sherr , E.B. & Sherr , B.F. ( 2008b ) Heterotrophic dinofl agellates: reveals new distinctive characters . Journal of the Marine
a signifi cant component of microzooplankton biomass and Biological Association of the United Kingdom , 85 , 783 – 786 .
major grazers of diatoms in the sea . M arine Ecology Progress Skovgaard , A. , Massana , R. , Balague , V. & Saiz , E. ( 2005 )
Series , 352 , 187 – 197 . Phylogenetic position of the copepod - infesting parasite
Sherr , E.B. , Sherr , B.F. , Fallon , R.D. & Newell , S.Y. ( 1986 ) Syndinium turbo (Dinofl agellata, Syndinea) . P rotist , 156 ,
Small aloricate ciliates as a major component of the marine 413 – 423 .
heterotrophic nanoplankton . L imnology and Oceanography , Skovgaard , A. , Massana , R. & Saiz , E. ( 2007 ) Parasitic species
31 , 177 – 183 . of the genus Blastodinium (Blastodiniphyceae) are peridin-
Shimeta , J. , Jumars , P.A. & Lessard , E.J. ( 1995 ) Infl uences of ioid dinofl agellates . Journal of Phycology , 43 , 553 – 560 .
turbulence on suspension feeding by planktonic protozoa; Skovgaard , A. , Meneses , I. & Ang é lico , M.M. ( 2009 ) Identify-
experiments in laminar shear fi elds . L imnology and Oceanog- ing the lethal fi sh egg parasite Ichthyodinium chabelardi
raphy , 40 , 845 – 859 . as a member of Marine Alveolate Group I . E nvironmental
Shoresh , N. , Hegreness , M. & Kishony , R. ( 2008 ) Evolution Microbiology , 11 , 2030 – 2041 .
exacerbates the paradox of the plankton . P roceedings of the * Skryabin , V.A. & Al - Yamani , F.Y. ( 2006 ) New Species of
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , Genera Tintinnopsis , Metacylis and Eutintinnus (Ciliophora,
105 , 12365 – 12369 . Spirotrichea, Tintinnida) from the Kuwaiti Waters of the
Sieburth , J. Mc N., Smetacek , V. & Lenz , J. ( 1978 ) Pelagic Arabian Gulf . Russian Journal of Marine Biology , 32 ,
ecosystem structure: heterotrophic compartments of the 302 – 307 .
plankton and their relationship to plankton size fractions . * Skryabin , V.A. & Al - Yamani , F.Y. ( 2007 ) Composition, distri-
Limnology and Oceanography , 23 , 1256 – 1263 . bution and seasonal changes of tintinnids in the north-
Silberman , J.D. , Collins , A.G. , Gershwin , L.A. , Johnson , P.J. western Arabian Gulf around the Bubiyan Island .
& Roger , A.J. ( 2004 ) Ellobiopsids of the genus T hallassomy- International Journal of Oceans and Oceanography , 2 ,
ces are alveolates . J ournal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 5 , 99 – 106 .
246 – 252 . Slapeta , J. , Lopez - Garcia , P. , Moreira , D. 2006 . Global disper-
* Silva , E.S. ( 1950 ) Les tintinnides de la Baie de Cascais (Por- sal and ancient cryptic spieces in the smallest marine
tugal) . Bulletin de L ’ institut Oceanographique, Monaco , 979 , eukaryotes . Molecular Biology and Evolution , 23 , 23 – 29 .
1 – 28 . Sleytr , U.B. , S á ra , M. , Pum , D. & Schuster , B. ( 2001 ) Charac-
* Silva , E.S. ( 1953 ) Estudios de plancton na Lagoa de Obidos. terization and use of crystalline bacterial cell surface layers .
II. Tintinnoinea . R ev. Fac. Cienc. Lisboa, Serie 2 2 , 97 – 116 . Progress in Surface Science , 68 , 231 – 278 .
Simonelli , P. , Troedsson , C. , Nejstgaard , J.C. , Zech , K. , Larsen , Small , E.B. & Lynn , D.H. ( 1985 ) Phylum Ciliophora Dofl ein,
J.B. & Frischer , M.E. ( 2009 ) Evaluation of DNA extraction 1901 . In An Illustrated Guide to the Protozoa ( J.J. Lee ,
and handling procedures for PCR -b ased copepod feeding S.H. Hutner & E.C. Bovee eds), pp. 393 – 575 , Society of
studies . J ournal of Plankton Research , 31 , 1465 – 1474 . Protozoologists, Allen Press , Lawrence, Kansas .
Simpson , A.G.B. & Patterson , D.J. ( 1996 ) Ultrastructure and Small , H.J. , Neil , D.M. , Taylor , A.C. , Atkinson , R.J. & Coombs ,
identifi cation of the predatory fl agellate C olpodella pugnax G.H. ( 2006 ) Molecular detection of Hematodinium spp.
Cienkowski (Apicomplexa) with a description of C olpodella in Norway lobster Nephrops norvegicus and other crusta-
turpis n. sp. and a review of the genus . Systematic Parasitol- ceans . Diseases of Aquatic Organisms , 69 , 185 – 195 .
ogy , 33 , 187 – 198 . Small , H.J. , Shields , J.D. , Moss , J.A. & Reece , K.S. ( 2007 ) Con-
Sipura , J. , Lores , E. & Snyder , R.A. ( 2003 ) Effect of copepods servation in the fi rst internal transcribed spacer region
on estuarine microbial plankton in short - term microcosms . (ITS1) inHematodinium species infecting crustacean hosts
Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 33 , 181 – 190 . found in the UK and Newfoundland . Diseases of Aquatic
* Sitran , R. , Bergamasco , A. , Decembrini , E. & Guglielmo , L. Organisms , 75 , 251 – 258 .
( 2007 ) Temporal succession of tintinnids in the northern Smalley , G.W. & Coats , D.W. (2002) . Ecology of the red - tide
Ionian Sea, Central Mediterranean . Journal of Plankton dinofl agellate Ceratium furca : Distribution, mixotrophy, and
Research , 29 , 495 – 508 . grazing impact on ciliate populations of Chesapeake Bay .
* Sitran , R. , Bergamasco , A. , Decembrini , E. & Guglielmo , L. Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 49 , 63 – 73 .
( 2009 ) Microzooplankton (tintinnid ciliates) diversity: Smalley , G.W. , Coats , D.W. & Adam , E.J. ( 1999 ) A new method
coastal community structure and driving mechanisms in using fl uorescent microspheres to determine grazing on
the southern Tyrrhenian Sea (Western Mediterranean) . ciliates by the mixotrophic dinofl agellate Ceratium furca .
Journal of Plankton Research , 3 1 , 153 – 170 . Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 17 , 167 – 179 .
Sjoqvist , O. & Lindholm , T.J. ( 2011 ) Natural co - occurrence of Smalley , G.W. , Coats , D.W. & Stoecker , D.K. ( 2003 ) Feeding in
Dinophysis acuminata (Dinofl agellata) and Mesodinium the mixotrophic dinofl agellate Ceratium furca is infl uenced

References 281
by intracellular nutrient concentrations . M arine Ecology hydrotherms in the Western Pacifi c . Journal of Plankton
Progress Series , 262 , 137 – 151 . Research , 20 , 1015 – 1031 .
* Smayda , T.J. ( 1958 ) Phytoplankton studies around Jan Southward , A.J. ( 1955 ) Observations on the ciliary currents
Mayen Island. March – April, 1955 . Nytt Magasin for Botan- of the jelly - fi sh Aurelia aurita L . Journal of the Marine Biologi-
ikk , 6 , 75 – 96 . cal Association of the United Kingdom , 34 , 201 – 216 .
* Smayda , T.J. ( 1966 ) A quantitative analysis of the phyto- * Souto , S. ( 1970a ) Tintinnidos de la costa Atlantica entre
plankton of the Gulf of Panama . B ulletin of the Inter - los 31 degree y 35 degree de latitude sur (Uruguay y sur
American Tropical Tuna Commission , 11 , 353 – 612 . de Brasil) (Protozoa, Ciliata) . Physis, Buenos Aires , 30 ,
* Smetacek , V. ( 1981 ) The annual cycle of protozooplankton 187 – 208 .
in the Kiel Bight . M arine Biology , 63 , 1 – 11 . * Souto , S. ( 1970b ) Tintinnidos de la costa Brasilera colectados
Smetacek , V. ( 1985 ) The annual cycle of Kiel Bight plankton: pro el Walther Herwig (Protozoa, Ciliata) . P hysis, Buenos
a long - term analysis . E stuaries and Coasts , 8 , 145 – 157 . Aires , 30 , 209 – 224 .
Smetacek , V. ( 2001 ) A watery arms race . N ature , 411 , 745 . * Souto , S. ( 1972 ) Tintinnidos subantarticos del Mar Argen-
* Sniezek , J.H. , Capriulo , G.M. , Small , E.B. & Russo , A. ( 1991 ) tino (Protozoa, Ciliata) . P hysis, Buenos Aires , 31 , 451 –
Nolaclusilis hudsonicus n. sp. (Nolaclusiliidae n. fam.) a bilat- 462 .
erally symmetrical tintinnine ciliate from the lower Hudson * Souto , S. ( 1973 ) Contribucion al conocimiento de los
River estuary . Journal of Protozoology , 38 , 589 – 594 . Tintinnidos de agua dulce de la republica Argentina. I. Rio
* Snoeyenbos - West , O.L.O. , Salcedo , T. , McManus , G.B. & Katz , de la Plata y del Parana . Physis, Buenos Aires , 32 , 249 –
L.A. ( 2002 ) Insights into the diversity of choreotrich and 254 .
oligotrich ciliates (Class: Spirotrichea) based on genealogi- * Souto , S. ( 1974 ) Tintinnidos del Rio de la Plata y su zona de
cal analyses of multiple loci . I nternational Journal of System- infl uencia . Physis, Buenos Aires , 33 , 201 – 205 .
atic and Evolutionary Microbiology , 52 , 1901 – 1913 . Souto , S. ( 1979 ) Titinnidos del Atlantico sudoccidental y
* Snyder , R.A. & Brownlee , D.C. ( 1991 ) Nolaclusilis bicornis Antartica Argentina (Protozoa), Cilato). Estudio Taxonom-
n. g., n. sp. (Tintinnina: Tintinnidiidae): a tintinnine ciliate ico, Distribucional y Ecologica. Tesis Diss, Univ. Buenos
with novel lorica and cell morphology from the Chesapeake Aires, Argentina.
Bay estuary . Journal of Protozoology , 38 , 583 – 589 . Spector , D.L. ( 1984 ). Dinofl agellate nuclei . In Dinofl agellates
Sokolova , Y.Y. & Gerassimova , Z.P. ( 1984 ) The ultrastructure ( D.L. Spector ed.), pp. 107 – 147 , Academic Press , London .
of the ciliates P arafavella denticulata Ehrenberg, 1840 . Tsi- Spittler , P. ( 1973 ) Feeding experiments with tintinnids . O ikos ,
tologiya , 26 , 1237 – 1245 + Plates 1 – 4 . 15 , 128 – 132 .
Sokolova , Y.Y. , Seravin , L.N. & Gerassimova , Z.P. ( 1986 ) * Srinivasan , A. , Santhanam , R. & Jegatheesan , G. ( 1988 )
Membrane structures and their supposed involvement in Biomass & seasonal distribution of planktonic tintinnids of
the digestive events with the ciliate P arafavella denticulata Pullavazhi Estuary, southeast coast of India . I ndian Journal
Ehrenberg, 1890 (Tintinnina) . T sitologiya , 28 , 220 – 224 . of Marine Sciences , 17 , 131 – 133 .
Song , W. ( 1993 ) Studies on the cortical morphogenesis Steele , T.W. & McLennan , A.M. ( 1996 ) Infection of T etrahy-
during cell division in H alteria grandinella (M ü ller, 1773) mena pyriformis by Legionella longbeachae and other Legionella
(Ciliophora, Oligotrichida) . Chinese Journal of Oceanology species found in potting mixes . Applied and Environmenal
and Limnology , 11 , 122 – 129 . Microbology , 62 , 1081 – 1083 .
Song , W. & Wilbert , N. ( 1989 ) Taxonomische Untersuchun- Steidinger , K.A. ( 1975 ) Basic factors infl uencing red tides . In
gen an Aufwuchsciliaten (Protozoa, Ciliophora) im Pop- Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Toxic Dino-
pelsdorfer Weiher, Bonn . L auterbornia 3 , 1 – 221 . fl agellate Blooms ( V.R. LoCicero ed.), pp. 153 – 162 , Massa-
Song , W.B. & Wilbert , N. (2002) Faunistic studies on marine chusetts Science and Technology Foundation , Wakefi eld,
ciliates from the Antarctic benthic area, including descrip- USA.
tions of one epizoic form, 6 new species and, 2 new genera Steinberg , D.K. ( 1995 ) Diet of copepods (S copalatum vorax )
(Protozoa: Ciliophora) . A cta Protozoologica , 41 , 23 – 61 . associated with mesopelagic detritus (giant larvacean
* Sorokin , Y.I. ( 1977 ) The heterotrophic phase of plankton houses) in Monterey Bay, California . Marine Biology , 122 ,
succession in the Japan Sea . M arine Biology , 41 , 107 – 571 – 584 .
117 . Stepanjants , S.D. , Cortese , G. , Kruglikova , S.B. & Bjorklund ,
Sorokin , Y.I. & Kogelschatz , J.E. ( 1979 ) Analysis of hetero- K.R. ( 2006 ) A review of bipolarity concepts: history and
trophic microplankton in an upwelling area . H ydrobiologia , examples from radiolaria and medusozoa (Cnidaria) .
66 , 195 – 208 . Marine Biology Research , 2 , 200 – 241 .
Sorokin , Y.I. , Kopylov , A.I. & Mamaeva , M.V. ( 1985 ) Abun- Stepien , C.A. ( 1986 ) Life history and larval development of
dance and dynamics of microplankton in the central tropi- the giant kelpfi sh, Heterostichus rostratus Girard, 1854 .
cal Indian Ocean . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 24 , Fishery Bulletin , 84 , 809 – 826 .
27 – 41 . Stepien W.P. , Jr . ( 1976 ) Feeding of laboratory - reared larvae of
Sorokin , Y.I. , Sorokin , P.I. & Zakuskina , O.Y. ( 1998 ) Micro- the sea breamArchosargus rhomboidalis (Sparidae) M arine
plankton and its functional activity in zones of shallow Biology 38 , 1 – 16 .

282 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Stibor , H. , Vadstein , O. , Diehl , S. , Gelzleichter , A. , Hansen , T. , microzooplankton . Journal of Plankton Research , 9 , 667 –
Hantzsche , F. & Katechakis , A. ( 2004 ) Copepods act as a 683 .
switch between alternative trophic cascades in marine Stoecker , D.K. , Taniguchi , A. & Michaels , A.E. ( 1989 ) Abun-
pelagic food webs . E cology Letters , 7 , 321 – 328 . dance of autotrophic, mixotrophic and heterotrophic
Stickney , H .L. , Hood , R.R. & Stoecker , D.K. ( 2000 ) The impact planktonic ciliates in shelf and slope waters . M arine Ecology
of mixotrophy on planktonic marine ecosystems . E cological Progress Series , 50 , 241 – 254 .
Modeling , 125 , 203 – 230 . Stoecker , D.K. , Gallager , S.M. , Langdon , C.J. & Davis , L.H.
Stoecker , D.K. ( 1984 ) Particle production by planktonic cili- ( 1995 ) Particle capture by Favella sp. (Ciliata, Tintinnina) .
ates . Limnology and Oceanography , 29 , 930 – 940 . Journal of Plankton Research , 17 , 1105 – 1124 .
Stoecker , D .K. ( 1988 ) Are marine planktonic ciliates suspen- Stoecker , D.K. , Gustafson , D.E. & Verity , P.G. ( 1996 ) Micro -
sion - feeders? Journal of Protozoology , 35 , 252 – 255 . and mesoprotozooplankton at 140 ° W in the equatorial
Stoecker , D.K. ( 1999 ) Mixotrophy among dinofl agellates . Pacifi c: heterotrophs and mixotrophs . Aquatic Microbial
Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology , 46 , 397 – 401 . Ecology , 10 , 273 – 282 .
Stoecker , D.K. & E gloff , D.A. ( 1987 ) Predation by Acartia tonsa * Stoecker , D.K. , Stevens , K. & Gustafson , D.E. ( 2000 ) Grazing
Dana on planktonic ciliates and rotifers . Journal Experimen- onPfi esteria piscicida by microzooplankton . A quatic Micro-
tal Marine Biology and Ecology , 110 , 53 – 68 . bial Ecology , 22 , 261 – 270 .
Stoecker , D.K. & Evans , G.T. ( 1985 ) Effects of protozoan her- Stoecker , D.K. , Parrow , M.W. , Burkholder , J.M. & Glasgow ,
bivory and carnivory in a microplankton food web . M arine H.B. Jr ( 2002 ) Grazing by microzooplankton on P fi esteria
Ecology Progress Series , 25 , 159 – 167 . piscicida cultures with different histories of toxicity . A quatic
Stoecker , D.K. & Govoni , J.J. ( 1984 ) Food selection by young Microbial Ecology , 28 , 79 – 85 .
larval Gulf menhaden (B revoortia patronus ) . Marine Biology , Stoecker , D.K. , Johnson , M.D. , de Vargas , C. & Not , F. ( 2009 )
80 , 299 – 306 . Acquired phototrophy in aquatic protists . Aquatic Microbial
Stoecker , D .K. & Guillard , R.R.L. ( 1982 ) Effects of temperature Ecology , 57 , 279 – 310 .
and light on the feeding rate of F avella sp. (ciliated Protozoa, Straile , D. ( 1997 ) Gross growth effi ciencies of protozoan
Suborder Tintinnina) . A nnales Institut Oceanographique, and metazoan zooplankton and their dependence on
Paris , 58 (Supplement), 309 – 318 . food concentration, predator – prey weight ratio, and taxo-
Stoecker , D.K. & & McDowell Capuzzo , J. ( 1990 ) Predation on nomic group . Limnology and Oceanography , 42 , 1375 –
protozoa: its importance to zooplankton . J ournal of Plank- 1385 .
ton Research , 12 , 891 – 908 . Strathmann , R.R. & Gr ü nbaum , D. ( 2006 ) Good eaters, poor
Stoecker , D.K. & Sanders , N.K. ( 1985 ). Differential grazing by swimmers: compromises in larval form . I ntegrative and
Acartia tonsa on a dinofl agellate and a tintinnid . J ournal of Comparative Biology , 46 , 312 – 322 .
Plankton Research 7 , 85 – 100 . Strelkow , A.A. & Wirketis , M.A. ( 1950 ) New planktonic infu-
* Stoecker , D.K. , Guillard , R.R.L. & Kavee , R.M. ( 1981 ) soria (suborder Tintinnoinea) from Peter the Great Bay .
Selective predation by F avella ehrenbergii (Tintinnia) on Doklady Akademii Nauk S.S.S.R. , 74 , 389 – 391 .
and among dinofl agellates . Biological Bulletin , 160 , 136 – Strom , S.L. ( 2001 ) Light - aided digestion, grazing and growth
145 . in herbivorous protists . Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 2 3 ,
* Stoecker , D.K. , Davis , L.H. & Provan , A. ( 1983 ) Growth of 253 – 261 .
Favella sp. (Ciliata: Tintinnina) and other microzooplank- Strom , S.L. & Loukos , H. ( 1998 ) Selective feeding by protozoa:
ters in cages incubated in situ and comparison to growth model and experimental behaviors and their consequences
in vitro . M arine Biology , 75 , 293 – 302 . for population stability . Journal of Plankton Research , 2 0 ,
Stoecker , D.K. , Davis , H.L. & Anderson , D.M. ( 1984 ) Fine scale 831 – 846 .
spatial correlations between planktonic ciliates and dino- Strom , S.L. & Welschmeyer , N.A. ( 1991 ) Pigment - specifi c
fl agellates . Journal of Plankton Research , 6 , 829 – 842 . rates of phytoplankton growth and microzooplankton
Stoecker , D.K. , Sunda , W.G. & Davis , L.H. ( 1986 ) Effects of grazing in the open subarctic Pacifi c Ocean . Limnology and
copper and zinc on two planktonic ciliates . M arine Biology , Oceanography , 36 , 50 – 63 .
92 , 21 – 29 . Strom , S.L. , Morello , T.A. & Bright , K.J. ( 1998 ) Protozoan size
Stoecker , D.K. , Cucci , T.L. , Hulburt , E.M. & Yentsch , C.M. infl uences algal pigment degradation during grazing .
( 1986 ) Selective feeding by B alanion sp. (Ciliata: Balanioni- Marine Ecology Progress Series , 164 , 189 – 197 .
dae) on phytoplankton that best support its growth . Journal Strom , S.L. , Wolfe , G.V. & Bright , K.J. ( 2007 ) Responses of
of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 95 , 113 – 130 . marine planktonic protists to amino acids: feeding inhibi-
Stoecker , D.K. , Michaels , A.E. & Davis , L.H. ( 1987a ) Grazing tion and swimming behavior in the ciliate Favella sp .
by the jellyfi sh, Aurelia aurita , on microzooplankton . J ournal Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 47 , 107 – 121 .
of Plankton Research , 9 , 901 – 915 . Str ü der - Kypke , M.C. & Lynn , D.H. ( 2003 ) Sequence analyses
Stoecker , D.K. , Verity , P.G. , Michaels , A.E. & Davis , L.H. of the small subunit rRNA gene confi rm the paraphyly
( 1987b ) Grazing by larval and post -l arval ctenophores on of oligotrich ciliates sensu lato and support the mono-

References 283
phyly of the subclasses Oligotrichia and Choreotrichia Sykes , P.F. & Huntley , M.E. ( 1987 ) Acute physiological reac-
(Ciliophora, Spirotrichea) . Journal of Zoology, London 260 , tions of C alanus pacifi cus to selected dinofl agellates: direct
87 – 97 . observations . Marine Biology , 94 , 19 – 24 .
Str ü der - Kypke , M.C. & Lynn , D.H. ( 2008 ) Morphological Symonds , M.R.E. & Johnson , C.N. ( 2006 ) Range size –
versus molecular data – phylogeny of tintinnid ciliates (Cili- abundance relationships in Australian Passerines . G lobal
ophora, Choreotrichia) inferred from small subunit rRNA Ecology and Biogeography , 15 , 143 – 152 .
gene sequences. D enisia , 23 , 417 – 424 . Tackx , M. , Irigoien , X. , Daro , N. , Castel , J. , Zhu , L. , Zhang , X.
Str ü der - Kypke , M.C. & Lynn, D .H. (2 010 ) Comparative analy- & Nijs , J. ( 1995 ) Copepod feeding in the Westerschelde and
sis of the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I the Gironde . Hydrobiologia , 311 , 71 – 83 .
(COI) gene in ciliates (Alveolata, Ciliophora) and evaluation * Taguchi , S. ( 1976 ) Microzooplankton and seston in Akkeshi
of its suitability as a biodiversity marker . S ystematics and Bay, Japan . Hydrobiologia , 50 , 195 – 204 .
Biodiversity , 8 , 131 – 148 . * Takahashi , K. & Ling , H.Y. ( 1984 ) Particle selectivity of
Str ü der - Kypke , M.C. & Montagnes , D.J.S. ( 2002 ) Development pelagic tintinnid agglutination . Marine Micropaleontology ,
of web - based guides to planktonic protists . A quatic Micro- 9 , 87 – 92 .
bial Ecology , 27 , 203 – 207 . * Takahashi , M. & Hoskins , K.D. ( 1978 ) Winter condition
Sullivan , L.J. ( 2010 ) Gut evacution of larval M nemiopsis of marine plankton populations in Saanich Inlet, B.C.,
leidyi A. Agassiz (Ctenophora, Lobata) . J ournal of Plankton Canada. II. Micro - zooplankton . J ournal of Experimental
Research , 32 , 69 – 74 . Marine Biology and Ecology , 32 , 27 – 37 .
Sullivan , L.J. & Gifford , D.J. ( 2007 ) Growth and feeding rates Tamigneaux , E. , Mingelbier , M. , Klein , B. & Legendre , L.
of the newly hatched larval ctenophore M nemiopsis ( 1997 ) Grazing by protists and seasonal changes in the size
leidyi A. Agassiz (Ctenophora, Lobata) . J ournal of Plankton structure of protozooplankton and phytoplankton in a
Research , 29 , 949 – 965 . temperate nearshore environment (western Gulf of St.
Sundt - Hansen , L.E. , Olsen , Y. , Stibor , H. , Heldal , M. & Vadstein , Lawrence, Canada) . Marine Ecology Progress Series , 146 ,
O. (2 006 ) T rophic cascades mediated by copepods, not 231 – 247 .
nutrient supply rate, determine the development of picocy- Tamura , M. , Katz , L.A. & McManus , G.B. ( 2011 ) Distribution
anobacteria . Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 45 , 207 – 218 . and diversity of oligotrich and choreotrich ciliates across
Suzuki , N. , Kurihara , T. & Matsuoka , A. ( 2009 ) Sporogenesis an environmental gradient in a large temperate estuary .
of an extracellular cell chain from the spheroidal radiolar- Aquatic Microbial Ecology , 64 , 51 – 67 .
ian host Haliommilla capillaceum (Haeckel), Polycystina, * Taniguchi , A. ( 1977 ) Biomass and size composition of
Protista . M arine Micropaleontology , 7 2 , 157 – 164 . copepod nauplii and tintinnids in the Philippine Sea and
Suzuki , T. ( 2000 ) Role of planktonic ciliates in partitioning of the Celebes Sea, summer 1972 . Bulletin of the Plankton
carbon fl ux in the ocean . O ceanography in Japan , 9 , 27 – 41 . Society of Japan , 24 , 1 – 10 .
Suzuki , T. & Taniguchi , A. ( 1995 ) Sinking rate of loricae of * Taniguchi , A. ( 1977 ) Distribution of microzooplankton in
some common tintinnid ciliates . Fisheries Oceanography , 4 , the Philippine Sea and the Celebes Sea in Summer, 1972 .
257 – 263 . Journal of the Oceanographic Society of Japan , 33 , 82 – 89 .
Swanberg , N.R. & Anderson , O.R. ( 1981 ) C ollozoum caudatum * Taniguchi , A. ( 1983 ) Microzooplankton distribution along a
sp. nov.: A giant colonial radiolarian from equatorial and transverse section crossing a marked oceanographic front .
Gulf Steam waters . D eep - Sea Research , 28 , 1033 – 1047 . La Mer, Tokyo , 21 , 95 – 101 .
Swanberg , N.R. & Anderson , O.R. ( 1985 ) The nutrition of * Taniguchi , A. ( 1984 ) Microzooplankton biomass in the
radiolarians: Trophic activity of some solitary Spumellaria . Arctic and Subarctic Pacifi c Ocean in the Summer . M emoirs
Limnology and Oceanography , 30 , 646 – 652 . of the National Institute of Polar Research, Special Issue 32 ,
Swanberg , N.R. & Caron , D.A. ( 1991 ) Patterns of sarcodine 63 – 76 .
feeding in epipelagic oceanic plankton . J ournal of Plankton * Taniguchi , A. & Hada , Y. ( 1981 ) Eutintinnus haslae n. sp.,
Research , 13 , 287 – 312 . a new ciliated protozoa from the tropical Pacifi c and Indian
Swanberg , N.R. , Harbison G.R. ( 1980 ) The ecology of C olloz- Oceans . La Mer, Tokyo , 19 , 18 – 22 .
oum longiforme . sp. nov. a new colonial radiolarian from * Taniguchi , A. & Kawakami , R. ( 1983 ) Growth rates of ciliate
the equatorial Atlantic Ocean . Deep - Sea Research , 27 , Eutintinnus lususundae and Favella taraikaensis observed in
715 – 731 . laboratory culture experiments . B ulletin of the Plankton
Swanberg , N.R. & Bennett , P. , Lindsey , J.L. & Anderson , O.R. Society of Japan , 30 , 33 – 40 .
( 1986 ) A comparative study of predation in two Caribbean Taniguchi , A. & Kawakami , R. ( 1985 ) Feeding activity of
Radiolarian populations . M arine Microbial Food Webs , 1 , a tintinnid ciliate Favella taraikaensis and its variability
105 – 118 . observed in laboratory cultures . M arine Microbial Food
Swofford , D.L. ( 2002 ) PAUP * . Phylogenetic analysis using Webs , 1 , 17 – 34 .
parsimony ( * and other methods) . Version 4.0b10. S inauer * Taniguchi , A. & Takeda , Y. ( 1988 ) Feeding rate and behavior
Associates , Sunderland, Massachusetts . of the tintinnid ciliate Favella taraikaensis observed with a

284 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
high speed VTR system . Marine Microbial Food Webs , 3 , Theola fragilis (Mollusca) . J ournal of Experimental Marine
21 – 34 . Biology and Ecology , 303 , 1 – 10 .
Tappan , H. ( 1993 ) Tintiinnids . In F ossil Prokaryotes and Pro- * Tumantseva , N.I. ( 1983 ) Ecology of tintinnids in the equa-
tists ( J.H. Lipps ed.), pp. 285 – 303 , Blackwell Scientifi c Pub- torial Pacifi c and coastal Peruvian region . O ceanology , 2 3 ,
lications , Boston, USA. 244 – 248 .
Tappan , H. & Loeblich , A.R. Jr ( 1968 ) Lorica composition of * Tumantseva , N.I. ( 1989 ) Role of mass species of infusoria
modern and fossil Tintinnida (ciliate Protozoa), systemat- in the consumption of phytoplankton in Antarctic and
icsm geological distribution, and some new tertiary taxa . Subantarctic waters of the Pacifi c Ocean . Oceanology , 2 9 ,
Journal of Paleontology , 42 , 1378 – 1394 . 96 – 99 .
Taylor , F.J.R. ( 1982 ) Symbiosis in marine microplankton . Turchin , P. ( 2003 ) C omplex Population Dynamics: a Theoretical/
Annales de l ’ Institut Oc é anographique de Paris , 5 8 (Supple- Empirical Synthesis . Princeton University Press , Princeton,
ment), 61 – 90 . USA.
Taylor , F.J.R. ( 1987 ) Ecology of dinofl agellates: General and Turner , J.T. ( 1981 ) Latitudinal patterns of calanoid and cyclo-
marine ecosystems . In T he Biology of Dinofl agellates ( F.J.R. poid diversity in estuarine waters of eastern North America .
Taylor ed.), pp. 3 99 – 501 . Blackwell Scientifi c Publications , Journal of Biogeography , 8 , 369 – 382 .
London . Turner , J.T. ( 1984a ) The feeding ecology of some zooplankters
* Thompson , G.A. & Alder , V.A. ( 2005 ) Patterns in tintinnid that are important prey items of larval fi sh . NOAA Technical
species composition and abundance in relation to hydro- Report NMFS 7 , U.S. Department of Commerce, National
logical conditions of the southwestern Atlantic during Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminstration, National Marine
austral spring. A quatic Microbial Ecology , 40 , 85 – 101 . Fisheries Service.
* Thompson , G.A. , Alder , V.A. , Boltovskoy , D. & Brandini , F.P. Turner , J.T. ( 1984b ) Zooplankton feeding ecology: contents of
( 1999 ) Abundance and biogeography of tintinnids (Cilio- fecal pellets of the copepods Eucalanus pileatus and Paraca-
phora) and associated microzooplankton in the South- lanus quasimodo from continental shelf waters of the Gulf
western Atlantic Ocean . J ournal of Plankton Research , 21 , of Mexico. Marine Ecology Progress Series , 15 , 27 – 46 .
1265 – 1298 . * Turner , J.T. & Anderson , D.M. ( 1983 ) Zooplankton grazing
* Thompson , G.A. , Alder , V.A. & Boltovskoy , D. ( 2001 ) Tintin- during dinofl agellate blooms in a Cape Cod embayment,
nids (Ciliophora) and other net microzooplankton (> 30 um) with observations of predation upon tintinnids by cope-
in southwestern Atlantic shelf break waters . P .S.Z.N.I. pods . P ubblicazioni della Stazione Zoologica di Napoli I: Marine
Marine Ecology , 22 , 343 – 355 . Ecology , 4 , 359 – 374 .
Tiselius , P. ( 1989 ) Contribution of aloricate ciliates to the diet * Turner , J.T. & Tester , P.A. ( 1992 ) Zooplankton feeding
of A cartia clausi and C entropages hamatus in coastal waters . ecology: bacterivory by metazoan microzooplankton .
Marine Ecology Progress Series , 56 , 49 – 56 . Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology , 160 ,
* Tiselius , P. ( 1992 ) Behavior of A cartia tonsa in patchy 149 – 167 .
environments . L imnology and Oceanography , 3 7 , 1640 – Turner , J.T. , Doucette , G.J. , Powell , C.L. , Kulis , D.M. , Keafer ,
1651 . B.A. & Anderson , D.M. ( 2000 ) Accumulation of red tide
* Toklu - Ali ç h , B. , Balkis , N. , Toklu , A.S. & H ö bek , A. ( 2010 ) toxins in larger size fractions of zooplankton assemblages
First Record of A mphorellopsis tetragona (Protozoa: Cilio- from Massachusetts Bay, USA. Marine Ecology Progress
phora: Tintinnina) from the Sea of Marmara . IUFS Journal Series , 202 , 95 – 107 .
of Biology , 69 , 41 – 44 . Turner , J.T. , Doucette , G.J. , Keafer , B.A. & Anderson , D.M.
* Travers , A. & Travers , M. ( 1971 ) Catalogue des tintinnides ( 2005 ) Trophic accumulation of PSP toxins in zooplankton
(Cilies Oligotriches) recoltes dans le Golfe de Marseille de during Alexandrium fundyense blooms in Casco Bay, Gulf
1962 a 1964 . Tethys , 2 , 639 – 646 . of Maine, April – June 1998. II. Zooplankton abundance
* Travers , M. ( 1973 ) Le microplancton du Golfe de Marseille: and size - fractionated community composition . D eep - Sea
Variations de la composition systematique et de la densit é Research II , 52 , 2784 – 2800 .
des populations . T ethys , 5 , 31 – 53 . Turriff , N. , Runge , J.A. & Cembella , A.D. ( 1995 ) Toxin accu-
Troedsson , C. , Simonelli , P. , Nagele , V. , Nejstgaard , J.C. & mulation and feeding behaviour of the planktonic copepod
Frischer , M.E. ( 2009 ) Quantifi cation of copepod gut content Calanus fi nmarchicus exposed to the red - tide dinofl agellate
by differential length amplifi cation quantitative PCR (dla - Alexandrium excavatum . Marine Biology , 123 , 55 – 64 .
qPCR) . M arine Biology , 156 , 253 – 259 . Uchida , T. Matsuyama , Y. , Yamaguchi , M. & Honjo , T. ( 1996 )
Tsuda , A. , Furuya , K. & Nemoto , T. ( 1989 ) Feeding of micro - The life cycle of G yrodinium instriatum (Dinophyceae) in
and macrozooplankton at the subsurface chlorophyll culture . Phycological Research , 44 , 119 – 123 .
maximum in the subtropical North Pacifi c . Journal of Exper- Uchida , T. , Kamiyama , T. & Matsuyama , Y. ( 1997 ) Predation
imental Marine Biology and Ecology , 132 , 41 – 52 . by a photosynthetic dinofl agellate G yrodinium instriatum
Tsujino , M. & Uchida , T. ( 2004 ) Fate of resting cysts of A lex- on loricated ciliates . J ournal of Plankton Research , 19 , 603 –
andrium spp. ingested by P erinereis nuntia (Polychaeta) and 608 .

References 285
Urban , J.L. , McKenzie , C.H. & Deibel , D. ( 1992 ) Seasonal dif- gansett Bay, Rhode Island . Estuarine , Coastal and Shelf
ferences in content of O ikopleura vanoeffeni and C alanus fi n- Science , 24 , 671 – 690 .
marchicus faecal pellets: illustrations of zooplankton food Verity , P.G. ( 1988 ) Chemosensory behaviour in marine cili-
web shifts in coastal Newfoundland waters . M arine Ecology ates . Bulletin of Marine Science , 43 , 772 – 782 .
Progress Series , 84 , 255 – 264 . Verity , P.G. ( 1991a ) Measurement and simulation of prey
* Uribe , E. , Castillo , J. ( 1982 ) Tintinnidos indicadores de masas uptake by marine planktonic ciliates fed plastidic and
agua . I nvestnes Mar., Valpara ¡ so 10 , 15 – 34 . aplastidic nanoplankton . Limnology and Oceanography ,
* Urrutxurtu , I. ( 2004 ) Seasonal succession of tintinnids in 36 , 729 – 750 .
the Nervi ó n River estuary, Basque Country, Spain . J ournal Verity , P.G. ( 1991b ) Feeding in planktonic protozoans: evi-
of Plankton Research , 26 , 307 – 314 . dence for non - random acquisition of prey . J ournal of Proto-
Van Breemen , P.J. ( 1905 ) Plankton van Noordzee en Zuiderzee. zoology , 38 , 69 – 76 .
PhD Thesis, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands. Verity , P.G. & Langdon , C. ( 1984 ) Relationships between lorica
Van Der Meeren , T. & Naess , T. ( 1993 ) How does cod volume, carbon, nitrogen, and ATP content of tintinnids
(Gadus morhua ) cope with variability in feeding conditions in Narragansett Bay . J ournal of Plankton Research , 6 ,
during early larval stages . Marine Biology , 116 , 637 – 859 – 868 .
647 . Verity , P.G. & Stoecker , D.K. ( 1982 ) Effects of O listhodiscus
van Hengstum , P.J. & Scott , D.B. ( 2011 ) Ecology of foraminif- luteus on the Growth and Abundance of Tintinnids . Marine
era and habitat variability in an underwater cave; distin- Biology , 72 , 79 – 87 .
guishing anchialine versus submarine cave environments . Verity , P.G. & Villareal , T.A. ( 1986 ). The relative food value of
Journal of Foraminiferal Research , 41 , 201 – 229 . diatoms, dinofl agellates, fl agellates and cyanobacteria for
Vanh ö ffen , E. ( 1897 ) Die Fauna und Flora Gr ö nlands . In tintinnid cultures. A rchiv fur Protistenkunde , 131 , 71 – 84 .
Gr ö nland - Expedition der Gesellschaft f ü r Erdkunde zu Berlin Verity , P.G. , Robertson , C.Y. , Tronzo , C.R. , Andrews , M.G. ,
1891 – 1893 , Vol. 2 ( E. von Drygalski ed.). Nelson , J.R. & Sieracki , M.E. ( 1992 ) Relationships between
Vannini , C. , Petroni , G. , Schena , A. , Verni , F. & Rosati , G. cell volume and the carbon and nitrogen content of marine
( 2003 ) Well - established mutualistic associations between photosynthetic nanoplankton . L imnology and Oceanogra-
ciliates and prokaryotes might be more widespread and phy , 37 , 1434 – 1446 .
diversifi ed than so far supposed . European Journal of Protis- Verity , P.G. , Stoecker , D.K. , Sieracki , M.E. , Burkhill , P.H. ,
tology , 39 , 481 – 485 . Edwards , E.A. & Tronzo , C.R. ( 1993 ) Abundance, biomass
Van Wagtendonk , W.J. ( 1955 ) Encystment and excystment and distribution of heterotrophic dinofl agellates during
of protozoa . In B iochemistry and Physiology of Protozoa . the North Atlantic spring bloom . Deep - Sea Research , 4 0 ,
( S.H. Hunter and A. Lwoff eds), Vol. II , pp. 85 – 90 , Aca- 227 – 244 .
demic Press , New York, USA. Verity , P.G. , Paffenhofer , G.A. , Wallace , D. , Sherr , E. & Sherr ,
Vargas , C.A. & Gonzalez , H.E. ( 2004 ) Plankton community B. ( 1996 ) Composition and biomass of plankton in spring
structure and carbon cycling in a coastal upwelling system. on the Cape Hatteras shelf, with implications for carbon
I. Bacteria, microprotozoans and phytoplankton in the fl ux . Continental Shelf Research , 16 , 1087 – 1116 .
diet of copepods and appendicularians . A quatic Microbial Verni , F. & Rosati , G. ( 2011 ) Resting cysts: a survival strategy
Ecology , 34 , 151 – 164 . in Protozoa Ciliophora . I talian Journal of Zoology , 78 ,
Vargas , C.A. & Mart í nez , R.A. ( 2009 ) Grazing impact of 134 – 145 .
natural populations of ciliates and dinofl agellates in a river - Verni , F. , Rosati , G. & Nobili , R. ( 1977 ) Infection mechanism
infl uenced continental shelf . A quatic Microbial Ecology , 56 , of eta killing particles in sensitive cells of the ciliate E uplotes
93 – 108 . crassus . Transactions of the American Microscopical Society ,
* Verity , P.G. ( 1984 ) The Physiology and Ecology of Tintinnids 96 , 363 – 369 .
in Narragansett Bay, Rhode Island. Ph.D. Dissertation, Uni- Verweij , G.L. , Esselink , K. , Fockens , K. & Koeman , R.P.T.
versity of Rhode Island, Kingston, USA. ( 2005 ) Biomonitoring van microzooplankton in de Neder-
Verity , P.G. ( 1985 ) Grazing, respiration, excretion, and growth landse zoute watern 204. Rapport 2005 - 024, Koeman
rates of tintinnids . L imnology and Oceanography , 30 , en Bijkerk Ecologisch Onderzoek en Advies, Haren,
1268 – 1282 . Netherlands.
* Verity , P.G. ( 1986a ) Growth rates of natural tintinnid popu- * Vitello , P. ( 1964 ) Contribution a l ’ etude des tintinnides de la
lations in Narragansett Bay . M arine Ecology Progress Series , Baie d ’ Alger . Pelagos , 2 , 5 – 41 .
29 , 117 – 126 . Vogel , S. ( 1996 ) L ife in Moving Fluids: the Physical Biology of
Verity , P.G. ( 1986b ) Grazing of phototrophic nanoplankton by Flow , 2nd Ed . Princeton University Press , Princeton, USA.
microzooplankton in Narragansett Bay . M arine Ecology von Herbing , I.H. & Gallager , S.M. ( 2000 ) Foraging behavior
Progress Series , 29 , 105 – 115 . in early Atlantic cod larvae (G adus morhua) feeding on a
* Verity , P.G. ( 1987 ) Abundance, community composition, size protozoan (B alanion sp.) and a copepod (P seudodiatomus sp) .
distribution, and production rates of tintinnids in Narra- Marine Biology , 136 , 591 – 602 .

286 The biology and ecology of tintinnid ciliates
Voss , H. - J. ( 1989 ) Vergleichende morphogenetische Untersu- Wickham , S.A. ( 1995 ) Cyclops predation on ciliates: species -
chung von 13 Arten der Gattung Euplotes (Ciliophora, specifi c differences and functional responses . J ournal of
Hypotrichida) . Archiv f ü r Protistenkunde , 137 , 331 – 344 . Plankton Research , 17 , 1633 – 1646 .
Waggoner , B.J. ( 1994 ) An aquatic microfossil assemblage Wille , J.J. Jr , Weidner , E. & Steffens , W.L. ( 1981 ) Intranuclear
from Cenomanian amber of France . L ethaia , 27 , 77 – 84 . parasitism of the ciliate Euplotes by a trypanosomatid fl ag-
* Wailes , G.H. ( 1925 ) Tintinnidae from the Strait of Georgia. ellate . Journal of Protozoology , 28 , 223 – 227 .
B.C . B ritish Columbia Contributions to Canadian Biology, New Williams , R. , McCall , H. , Pierce , R.W. & Turner , J.T. ( 1994 )
Series 2 , 533 – 539 . Speciation of the tintinnid genus C ymatocylis by morpho-
* Wang , C.C. ( 1936 ) Notes on Tintinnoinea from the Gulf of metric analysis of the loricae . Marine Ecology Progress
Pe - Hai . Sinensia, Shanghai , 8 , 353 – 370 . Series , 107 , 263 – 272 .
* Wang , C.C. & Nie , D. ( 1932 ) A survey of the marine protozoa Williamson , M. ( 1997 ) Marine biodiversity in its global
of Amoy . Contributions of the Biological Laboratory, Science context . In Marine Biodiversity: Patterns and Processes ( R.F.G.
Society of China Zoological Series , 8 , 283 – 385 . Ormond , J.D. Gage , J.D. and M.V. Angel eds), pp. 1 – 17 ,
Wasik , A. ( 1998 ) Antarctic tintinnids: their ecology, mor- Cambridge University Press , Cambridge, UK .
phology, ultrastructure and polymorphism . Acta Protozoo- Wilson , C.B. ( 1942 ) The copepods of the plankton gathered
logica , 37 , 5 – 15 . during the last cruise of the Carnegie . Carnegie Institution
* Wasik , A. & Miko ł ajczyk , E. ( 1990 ) Tintinnids near pack - ice of Washington, Publication 536 , Washington DC, USA .
between South Shetland and the South Orkney Islands * Winter , A. , Stockwell , D. & Hargraves , P.E. ( 1986 ) Tintinnid
(26 Dec. 1988 – 18 Jan. 1989) . A cta Protozoologica , 2 9 , 229 – agglutination of coccoliths: a selective or random process?
244 . Marine Micropaleontology , 10 , 375 – 379 .
Wasik , A. & Miko ł ajczyk , E. ( 1992 ) The morphology and Wittenrich , M.L. , Rhody , N.R. , Turingan , R.G. & Main , K.L.
ultrastructure of the Antarctic ciliate, C ymatocylis conval- ( 2009 ) Coupling osteological development of the feeding
laria (Tintinnina) . Acta Protozoologica , 31 , 233 – 239 . apparatus with feeding performance in common snook,
* Wasik , A. & Miko ł ajczyk , E. ( 1994a ) Annual cycle of tintin- Centropomus undecimalis , larvae: identifying morphological
nids in Admiralty Bay with an emphasis on seasonal vari- constraints to feeding . A quaculture , 294 , 221 – 227 .
ability in Cymatocylis affi nis/convallaria lorica morphology . Won , M. - Z. & Below , R. ( 1999 ) Cambrian Radiolaria from the
Journal of Plankton Research , 16 , 1 – 8 . Georgina basin, Queensland, Australia . M icropaleontology
Wasik , A. & Miko ł ajczyk , E. ( 1994 b) Infraciliature of C ymato- 45 , 325 – 363 .
cylis affi nis/convallaria (Tintinnina) . A cta Protozoologica , Woodd - Walker , R.S. , Ward , P. & Clarke , A. ( 2002 ) Large - scale
33 , 79 – 85 . patterns in diversity and community structure of surface
Wasik , A. , Miko ł ajczyk , E. & Ligowski , R. ( 1996 ) Aggluti- water copepods from the Atlantic Ocean. M arine Ecology
nated loricae of some Baltic and Antarctic Tintinnina Progress Series , 236 , 189 – 203 .
species (Ciliophora). J ournal of Plankton Research , 1 8 , Wright , A. - D.G. & Lynn , D.H. ( 1997 ) Maximum ages of ciliate
1931 – 1940 . lineages estimated using a small subunit rRNA molecular
Wasik , A. , Mikolajczyk , E. & Go ł ę biowska , M. ( 1997a ) Mor- clock: crown eukaryotes date back to the paleoprotoero-
phology and microstructure of selected Tintinnina loricae . zoic . Archive fur Protistenkunde , 148 , 329 – 341 .
Acta Protozoologica , 36 , 31 – 38 . Xu , D. , Song , W. , Warren , A. , Roberts , D. & Hu , X. ( 2007 )
Wasik , A. , Miko ł ajczyk , E. , Go łę biowska , M. & Sikora , J. Redescriptions of two marine planktonic ciliates from
( 1997b ) X - ray analysis and cytochemical staining of some China,Parastrombidium faurei (Kahl, 1932) Maeda, 1986
tintinnid loricae . Acta Protozoologica , 36 , 153 – 155 . andStrombidium capitatum (Leegaard, 1915) Kahl, 1932
Watanabe , M.M. , Watanabe , M. , Fukuyo , Y. ( 1982 ) Encyst- (Ciliophora, Oligotrichea). European Journal of Protistology ,
ment and excystment of red tide fl agellates. I. S crippsiella 43 , 27 – 35 .
trochoidea . Research Report from the National lnstitute for Xu , D. , Sun , P. , Shin , M.K. & Kim , Y.O. ( 2012 ) Species
Environrnental Studies , 30 , 27 – 42 . boundaries in tintinnid ciliates: a case study – morphomet-
Watras , C.J. , Garcon , V.C. , Olson , R.J. , Chisholm , S.W. & ric variability, molecular characterisation, and temporal
Anderson , D.M. ( 1985 ) The effect of zooplankton distribution of Helicostomella species (Ciliophora, Tintin-
grazing on estuarine blooms of the toxic dinofl agellate nina) . Journal of Eukaryotic Microbioplogy , 59 , in press.
Gonyaulax tamarensis . Journal of Plankton Research , 7 , Xu , K. , Choi , J.K. , Lei , Y. & Yang , E.J. ( 2011 ) Marine ciliate
891 – 908 . community in relation to eutrophication of coastal waters
Watson , W. & Davis , R.L. Jr ( 1989 ) Larval fi sh diets in shallow in the Yellow Sea . Chinese Journal of Oceanology and Limnol-
coastal waters off San Onofre, California . F ishery Bulletin , ogy , 29 , 118 – 127 .
87 , 569 – 591 . Yamaguchi , M. , Itakura , S. , Imai , I. & Ishida , Y. ( 1995 ) A rapid
White , A.W. ( 1981 ) Marine zooplankton can accumulate and and precise technique for enumeration of resting cysts
retain dinofl agellate toxins and cause fi sh kills . Limnology of Alexandrium spp. (Dinophyceae) in natural sediments .
and Oceanography , 26 , 103 – 109 . Phycologia , 34 , 207 – 214 .

References 287
Yamaguchi , M. , S. Itakura , K. Nagasaki & Y. Kotani ( 2002 ). Zarauz , L. , Irigoien , X. & Fernandes , J.A. ( 2009 ) Changes
Distribution and abundance of resting cysts of the toxic in the plankton size structure and composition, during
Alexandrium spp. in sediments of the western Seto Inland the generation of a phytoplankton bloom, in the central
Sea, Japan . F isheries Science , 68 , 1012 – 1019 . Cantabrian sea . J ournal of Plankton Research , 31 , 193 –
* Yamamoto , T. , Taniguchi , A. & Nishizawa , S. ( 1981 ) Micro- 207 .
plankton distribution at an oceanic front formed in the * Zeitzschel , B. ( 1982 ) Zoogeography of pelagic marine proto-
Sanriku Waters off Northeast Japan . B ulletin of the Plankton zoa . A nnales de L ’ institute Oceanographique, Paris 5 8 ( S ),
Society of Japan , 28 , 111 – 120 . 91 – 116 .
Yang , E.J. , Choi , J.K. & Hyun , J. - H. ( 2008 ) Seasonal variation Zeldis , J. , Robinson , K. , Ross , A. & Hayden , B. ( 2004 ) First
in the community and size structure of nano - and micro- observations of predation by New Zealand greenshell
zooplankton in Gyeonggi Bay, Yellow Sea . E stuarine, Coastal mussels ( Perna canaliculus ) on zooplankton . Journal of
and Shelf Science , 77 , 320 – 330 . Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology , 311 , 287 – 299 .
Yang , E.J. , Ju , S - J. , Choi , J. - K. ( 2010 ) Feeding activity of the * Zhang , C. , Zhang , W. , Xiao , T. , L ü , R. , Sun , S. & Song , W.
copepod Acartia hongi on phytoplankton and micro - zoo- ( 2008 ) Meso - scale spatial distribution of large tintinnids in
plankton in Gyeonggi Bay, Yellow Sea . E stuarine, Coastal and early summer in southern Yellow Sea . C hinese Journal of
Shelf Science , 88 , 292 – 301 . Oceanology and Limnology , 26 , 81 – 90 .
Yoo , K. - I. & Kim , Y. - O. ( 1990 ) Taxonomical studies on tintin- * Zhang , C. , Zhang , W. , Xiao , T. , L ü , R. , Sun , S. & Song , W.
nids (Protozoa: Ciliata) in Korean coastal waters 2. Yongil ( 2009 ) Wintertime meso - scale horizontal distribution of
Bay . Bulletin of the Korean Fisheries Society , 6 , 87 – 122 . large tintinnids in the southern Yellow Sea . C hinese Journal
* Yoo , K. - I. & Lee , J. - B. ( 1987 ) On the trophic correlation of Oceanology and Limnology , 27 , 31 – 37 .
between tintinnids and dinofl agellates in Masan Bay, Korea . Zhang , Q. , Yi , Z. , Xu , D. , Al - Rasheid , K.A.S. , Gong , J. & Song ,
Bulletin of the Korean Fisheries Society , 20 , 230 – 236 . W. ( 2010 ) Molecular phylogeny of oligotrich genera O me-
Yoo , K.I. , Kim , Y. - O. & Kim , D. - Y. ( 1988 ) Taxonomical studies gastrombidium and Novistrombidium (Protozoa, Ciliophora)
on tintinnids (Protozoa: Ciliata) in Korean coastal waters. for the systematical relationships within Family Strombi-
1. Chinhae Bay . Bulletin of the Korean Fisheries Society , 4 , diidae . C hinese Journal of Oceanology and Limnology , 28 ,
67 – 90 . 769 – 777 .
Young , J.R. & Geisen , M. ( 2002 ) Xenospheres – associations Zhang , W. & Wang , R. ( 2000 ) Summertime ciliate and
of coccoliths resembling coccospheres . J ournal of Nanno- copepod Nauplii distributions and micro - zooplankton
plankton Research , 24 , 27 – 34 . herbivorous activity in the Laizhou Bay, Bohai Sea,
Yuasa , K. , Kamaishi , T. , Koh - ichiro , M. , Hutapea , J.H. , China . E stuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science , 5 1 , 103 –
Permana , G.N. & Nakazawa , A. ( 2007 ) Infection by a 114 .
protozoan endoparasite of the genus I chthyodinium in * Zhang , W. & Wang , R. ( 2002 ) Short term dynamics of ciliate
embryos and yolk - sac larvae of yellowfi n tuna T hunnus abundance in the Bohai Sea (China) . Chinese Journal of
albacares . Fish Pathology , 42 , 59 – 66 . Oceanology and Limnology , 20 , 135 – 141 .

ORGANISM INDEX
Acanthometra pellucida 164 Amphorella (Amphorides) brandtii 131 Bolinopsis infundibulum 128
Acanthostomella 4, 9, 76, 80, 82, 173, Amphorellopsis 72,80,166,216,217 Brandtiella 80,216,220,221
216, 217, 234 Amphorellopsis acuta 73,129 Brevoortia patronus 130
Acanthostomella conicoides 4 Amphorides 33,36,80,216,217 Bursaopsis 80
Acanthostemella norvegica 40,220, Amphorides amphora 241,242 Bursaria 35
225,229 Amphorides quadrilineata 7,91,96,98, Bursaria truncatella 181
Acarella 44 103,220,225,241 Buschiella 80
Acartia 98,123,136,140 Amplectella 79,80,216
Acartia clausi 125,141 Amplectella collaria 7,Plate 1.5 Calanus 135,140
Acartia hongi 125 Amplectellopsis 79,80,221 Calanus australis 125,136
Acartia tonsa 125,135,143,168,210 Amyloodinium ocellatum 161 Calanus cristatus 125
Aetideopsis antarctica 125 Anchoa mitchilli 130 Calanus fi nmarchicus 125
Aglantha digitale 127 Antarctomysis ohlinii 127 Calanus pacifi cus 125
Aglaura hemistoma 127,137 Antedon bifi da 133 Calanus plumchrus 125
Akashiwo sanguinea 149,151 Apostrombidium 69 Calanus propinquus 125
Albatrossiella 80 Arachnidium 44 Calanus tenuicornis 125
Alexandrium 143,144,183 Aratus pisonii 133 Canthariella 80,216,221
Alexandrium catenella 176 Archosargus rhomboidalis 132 Capillaster multiradiatus 133
Alexandrium fundyense 98 Ascampbelliella 78,80,216,221 Cafeteria 89
Alexandrium ostenfeldii 89,98 Ascampbelliella tortulata 40 Centropages typicus 125
Alexandrium tamarense 89,90,96,98, Ascampbelliella urceolata 131,241 Centropomus undecimalis 129
103,108,109,111,120,176,178, Askenasia 201 Ceratium 140,232,233,237–241
181,182 Atherinopsis californiensis 129 Ceratium furca 133,210
Ammodytes personatus 129 Aurelia aurita 128,133,140 Chaetoceros 89,140,142
Ammotretis rostratus 131 Aureoumbra lagunensis 91 Chrysaora quinquecirrha 128,137
Amoebophrya 148,149,150,151,158, Aurita aurita 137 Ciliospina 45
160,163,164,168 Cittarocyclis denticulate (Parafavella
Amoebophrya ceratii 164 Balanion 91,120,139 denticulata) 131
Amoebophrya grassei 164 Balanion comatum 201 Clevea 80
Amoebophrya rosei 164 Bentheogennema borealis 127 Climacocylis 20,21,32,36,37,39,79,
Amoebophrya tintinni 148,149,151, Bentheuphausia amblyops 126 80,81,216,220,221
160,165,166 Bicoea cf. maris 89 Climacocylis elongata 18
Amphidinium carterae 90 Blastodinium 161 Climacocylis scalaria 7
Amphileptus 172 Blepharisma 35 Climacocylis scalaroides 241
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
288

Organism index 289
Climacostomum 35 Cymatocylis antarctica 125,126,127, Epiplocyloides 80,216
Clupea harengus 130 129 Epiplocyloides reticulata 241
Coccidinium mesnili 158 Cymatocylis calyciformis 48,62 Epiplocylis 19,21,80,216,222,224,
Codonaria 20,61,70,75,80,131,132, Cymatocylis drygalskii 33,Plate 10.1 241
141,216,220,221 Cymatocylis vanhöffeni 33 Epiplocylis blanda 7,Plate 1.5
Codonaria cistelula 241 Cyphonautes 133 Epiplocylis undella 133
Codonella 4,20,23,36,37,39,44, Cyrtostrombidium 69 Epirhabdonella 80
45,53,61,63,69,72,75, Cyrtostrombidium boreale 173,179 Escherichia coli 97,116,181
76,80,141,166,189,216, Cyttarocylis 21,33,36,53,80,166, Eucalanus 135
217 215,216,221,230 Eucalanus bungii 155
Codonella apicata 73,74 Cyttarocylis brandti 20 Eucalanus pileatus 125,135
Codonella aspera 19,35 Cyttarocylis cassis 4,7,147, Euchaeta 135
Codonella campanella (Tintinnopsis Plate 1.5 Euchaeta antarctica 125
campanella) 147 Cyttarocylis (Favella) ehrenbergii 147 Euchaeta erebi 125
Codonella cratera 30,37,48,56,59, Cyttarocylis (Petalotrichia) eucecryphalus Euchaeta similis 125
61,76,83 133 Euduboscquella 148–152,154,163–165,
Codonella elongata 4,6,131 Cyttarocylis (Coxiella) helix 147 166,168
Codonellopsis 4,20,21,23,30,32,36, Euduboscquella anisospora 149,151,
37,39,53,61,63,64,69,72,75, Dadayiella 32,80,216,217,234,241 152,154,158,160,166
76,80,124,125,131,216,217, Dadayiella ganymedes 7,18,35,40, Euduboscquella aspida 149,150,151,
220,234 220,225,Plate 1.5, Plate 10.2 152,154,160,166,Plate 6.2
Codonellopsis americana 74 Daphnia 116 Euduboscquella cachoni 149–155,160,
Codonellopsis ecuadata 220,226 Daturella 21,80,216,221 166,167,Plate 6.1
Codonellopsis gaussi 32,37,125,126, Dicrateria inornata 96,103 Euduboscquella cnemata 149,151,152,
127,129,220,226 Dictyocysta 4,20,21,33,36,39,44,53, 154,159,160,166,Plate 6.3
Codonellopsis glacialis 48,62,76 61,69,72,75,76,80,131,216, Euduboscquella crenulata 149,151,
Codonellopsis lagunela 220,226 217 152,160,166
Codonellopsis mobilis 239 Dictyocysta (Cyttarocylis) cassis 147 Euduboscquella melo 164
Codonellopsis morchella 133 Dictyocysta elegans 33 Euduboscquella nucleocola 164
Codonellopsis nipponica 74 Dictyocysta fenestrata 131 Euphausia crystallorophias 126
Codonellopsis orthoceras 241 Dictyocysta lepida 7,241,Plate 1.5 Euphausia diomedeae 126
Codonellopsis pusilla 130 Dictyocysta mitra 19,34 Euphausia pacifi ca 126,136,210
Codonellopsis schabi 6,18,Plate 1.4, Dictyocysta reticulata 74,131 Euphausia similis 126
Plate 2.1 Didinium 44,172 Euphausia superba 126
Collozoum 134 Dinophysis 143 Euphausia vallentini 136
Collozoum caudatum 124 Dinophysis acuminata 144 Euplotes 35,46,139
Collozoum longiforme 124 Diplosphaera 124 Euplotes woodruffi 146
Colpoda 172 Dreissena polymorpha 139 Euplotespora binucleata 146
Conchoecia belgicae 129 Duboscquella 134,148,158,161,163, Eusirus tridentatus 127
Conchoecia isocheira 129 211 Eutintinnus 7,19,20,23,32,33,36,37,
Cothurnia 35 Duboscquella tintinni (cola) 148 39,45,56,57,63,64,69,72,73,
Cotylorhiza tuberculata 128 Duboscquella tintinnicola 14,17,156, 76,80,89–91,125,166,173,184,
Coxliella 79,80,82,91,114,166 158,160,163,166 216,217,233
Coxliella annulata 27,28 Duboscquodinium 148,161 Eutintinnus angustatus 36–39,48
Coxliella decipiens 27 Duboscquodinium collini 148,155,156, Eutintinnus apertus 141,220,225,
Coxliella helix 147,166 166 Plate 10.2
Coxliella laciniosa 152,166 Duboscquodinium kofoidi 148,155,156, Eutintinnus brandti 18,36,Plate 2.1,
Crassostrea virginica 139 158,160 Plate 2.2
Craterella (Ascampbellia) urceolata 130 Dunaliella tertiolecta 89,96,103 Eutintinnus fraknoii 73,148,156,157,
Cricundella 79,80 165,166,241
Cryptoperidinopsis 161 Encrasicholina purpurea 130 Eutintinnus inquilinus 2,4,88,109,
Cyclogramma 35 Engraulis mordax 130,139 142,Plate 1.1
Cyclotella caspia 89 Engraulis ringen 130 Eutintinnus lusus undae 101
Cyclotella meneghiniana 89 Eotintinnopsis pinniforma 189,190 Eutintinnus medius 241
Cymatocylis 21,33,37,61,69,74,80, Epicancella 80,216,222 Eutintinnus pectinis 13,33,48,58,73,
216,220,224,230 Epicranella 80 74,90–92,96,103,125,150–153,
Cymatocylis affi nis/convallaria 20,48, Epimeriella macronyx 127 155,166,167,210,Plate 6.1
62 Epinephelus septemfasciatus 132,139 Eutintinnus pinguis 141

290 Organism index
Eutintinnus(cont’d) Helicostomella fusiformis 125,129, Limnostrombidium 69
Eutintinnus stramentus 7,Plate 1.5 174,Plate 7.1 Limnostrombidium viride 184
Eutintinnus tenuis 48,152,241,242 Helicostomella longa 130,174,180, Lohmanniella 45,82,83
Eutintinnus tubulosa 124,Plate 7.1 183,Plate 7.1 Lohmanniella spiralis 87,88
Eutintinnus tubulosus 174,179,180, Helicostomella subulata 7,15,27,37, Luciella 161
183,209 40,96,103,104,125,133,174, Luminella (Stenosemella) 76
Evadne nordmanni 129,137 178,181,182,184,205,Plate 1.5, Lynnella 69
Plate 7.1
Fabrea 35 Hematodinium 163 Macruronus novaezelandiae 131
Favella 4,8,22,23,26,32,37,39,59, Heterocapsa 90 Mallotus villosus 130
63,72–74,76,79,80,87,88, Heterocapsa circularisquama 90,98, Maurolicus 132
91–93,98,99,100,103,104,106, 111,209 Meganyctiphanes norwegica 126,136
108–121, 125,128,130,131,133, Heterocapsa pygmaea 90 Melanogrammus aeglefi nus 130
134,136, 139,143,144,152,166, Heterocapsa triquetra 90,93,96,103, Membranicola 32,53,54,55,69,80,83
173,184,209,210,213,215,216, 109,120,180 Membranicola tamari 48,56
219,220,224,230,Plate 9.5 Heterometra savignii 133 Merlangius merlangus 130
Favella (Schmidingerella) arcuata (see also Heterosigma akashiwo 91,98,114, Meseres 35,45,46,49,69
Schmidingerella accuata) 76 182 Meseres corlissi 173,176,177
Favella adriatica 26 Heterostichus rostratus 130 Mesodinium 44,136,141,201
Favella azorica 90,124,135 Hexastylus 124 Mesodinium rubrum 141,201,205,
Favella campanula 73,117 Histriculus cavicola 181 212
Favella (Parafavella) denticulata 130 Holospora 146 Metacylis 72,73,80,89,91,108,125,
Favella ehrenbergii 15,21,24,26–28, Hymenodora frontalis 127 136,141,173,211,213,216,219,
29,48,57,59,61, 69,73,76,89, Hyperiella dilatata 127 220,Plate 9.5
90–92,96,98,103,106,111,113, Metacylis angulata 73,74,76,90,91,
114,117,132,133,140,144,147, Ichthyodinium 163 103
148,152,154,158,166 Isochrysis galbana 91,96,103 Metacylis mediterranea 7,Plate 1.5
Favella markusovszkyi 26 Isopsetta isolepis 131 Metridia 135
Favella panamensis 24,26,28,34,59, Metridia gerlachei 126
72,73,77,97,117,124–126,133, Karyoclastis tintinni 148,149 Metridia ochotensis 126
150–152,159,166,168,210,Plate Katodinium rotundatum 90,96,103 Metrida ornata 126
6.2, Plate 6.3 Microchirus variegates 132
Favella philippinensis 128,129,132 Laackmanniella 4,33,37,39,76,80, Micromesistius poutassou 130
Favella serrata 124,144 216,220,224 Micropogonias undulatus 132
Favella taraikaensis (see also Laackmanniella naviculaefera 37, Micrundella (Undella) 79
Schmidingerella taraikaensis) 89–92, 125–127,129 Minutocellus polymorphus 89
96,98,101,103,106,107,110, Laackmanniella prolongata Plate 10.1 Mitrocoma cellularia 127
111,117,120,124,125,132,143, Laboea 3,69 Mitrocomella polydiademata 127
174,176,177,182,184, Plate 7.1 Labrus 131 Mnemiopsis 141
Fragilariopsis doliolus 142 Lamprometra klunzingeri 133 Mnemiopsis leidyi 128
Frontonia 39 Laurentiella strenua 173 Monochrysis lutheri 96,103
Leegaardiella 83 Myrionecta rubra (Mesodinium rubrum)
Gadus morhua 130 Leegaardiella elbraechteri 69 141
Gaedius pungens 125 Leegaardiella ovalis 69,82 Mysis mixta 127
Gaetanus pileatus 125 Leegaardiella sol 69 Mytilus edulis 132,139
Globigerinoides sacculifer 124 Legionella 146
Gonyaulax polyedre 90 Legionella pneumophila 146 Nassula 35
Gonyaulax tamarensis 90 Leiostomus xanthurus 131 Nassulopsis 35
Gymnodinium tintinnicola 147,148 Leprotintinnus 4,30,32,39,45,80,82, Nematoscelis gracilis 126
Gyrodinium aureolum 90 128,129,173,216,219,220 Nematoscelis mirops 126
Gyrodinium instriatum 124,133,135, Leprotintinnus pellucidus 6,Plate 1.4 Neocalanus cristatus 204
178 Leptomonas ciliatorum 146 Neogloboquadrina pachyderma 233
Leptomonas karyophilus 146 Neomysis mixta 127
Halteria 44,45,46,49,69,141 Leuresthes tenuis 129 Niemarshallia 76,80
Halteria grandinella 100,173 Limacina helicina 128,137 Noctiluca 140,163
Helicostomella 4,32,33,80,82,88,126, Limanda limanda 131 Noctiluca scintillans 136,133
128,166,173,184,216,219,220, Limnoithona 135 Nolaclusilis 56,57,69,74,80
234 Limnoithona tetraspina 126,136,210 Nolaclusilis bicornis 48,58

Organism index 291
Nolaclusilis hudsonicus 48,58 Penillia 129 Rhabdonella spiralis 7,18,34–37,39,
Novistrombidium apsheronicum 69 Peridinium aciculiferum 161 Plate 1.5, Plate 2.1, Plate 2.2
Novistrombidium sinicum 69 Peridinium polonicum 161 Rhabdonellopsis 80,216,222
Perkinsus 163,164 Rhabdonellopsis apophysata 241
Odontophorella 80 Perna canaliculus 139 Rhabdosella 80
Oikopleura 128,137,140 Petalotricha 19,21,22,29,33,36,44, Rhizodomus 79,80
Oikopleura vanhoeffeni 128 79,80,216,222,230 Rhizodomus tagatzi 226,227
Oithona 126,135 Petalotricha ampulla 20,22,33 Rhizostoma pulmo 128
Oithona similis 126,141 Petalotricha pacifi ca 131 Rhodomonas lens 91
Olisthodiscus luteus 91 Pfi esteria 161 Rhodomonas 91
Oncaea curvata 126 Phacodinium 35 Rimostrombidium 69,82
Oodinium 164 Phaeocystis pouchetii 104 Rotundocylis 79,80
Opisthostrombidium 69 Phialidium 127
Orchomene rossi 127 Phrynorhombus norvegicus 132 Sagitta elegans 128,137
Ormosella 80 Physematium muelleri 124 Salpingacantha 20,61,80,141,216,
Ormosella trachelium 7,Plate 1.5 Physetocaris microphthalma 127 218
Orthopristis chrysoptera 130 Platichthys fl esus 131,139 Salpingella 20,29,33,61,72,80,125,
Ostrea edulis 132 Pleurobrachia bachei 128 135,141,166,216,218
Oxyrrhis 148,160,163 Pleuromamma xiphas 126 Salpingella acuminata 7,73,Plate 1.5
Oxyrrhis marina 117 Polarella glacialis 220 Salpingella subconica 142
Oxytricha 46,49 Polykrikos 161 Salpingelloides 80
Oxytricha granulifera 173 Poroecus 76,80,216,222 Sardina pilchardus 130
Proamphorella 80 Sardinops sagax 130
Paracalanus 135,140 Proboscidactyla fl avicirrata 127,136 Schmidingerella (see also Favella) 21,
Paracalanus quasimodo 126 Proplectella 19,33,36,79,80,133,216, 23,25,32,72–74,75,76,80,
Paracanthurus hepatus 129 222 82
Parafavella 21,29,33,37,39,40,53, Proplectella claparedei 241 Schmidingerella arcuata (see also Favella
80,82,128,165,166,216,220, Proplectella elipisoida 7,Plate 1.5 arcuata) 34,39,59,60,69,73,74,
223 Proplectella fastigata 131 76,78
Parafavelladenticulata 20,27,37 Prorocentrum 140 Schmidingerella taraikaensis (see also
Parafavella gigantean 20, 21, 33, 112 Prorocentrum mariaelebouriae 90 Favella taraikaensis) 40,73
Parafavella parumdentata 7,Plate 1.5, Prorocentrum minimum 90 Scophthalmus norvegicus 132
Plate 10.1 Prostelidiella 80 Scrippsiella
Parafolliculina violacea 35 Protocymatocylis 80 Scrippsiella hangoei 161
Paraholosticha sterkii 146 Protoperidinium 201 Scrippsiella trochoidea 90,178,182
Paralabrax 132 Protorhabdonella 80,216,218 Sebastiscus marmoratus 132
Paralichthys californicus 131 Protorhabdonella simplex 7,241,Plate Semitintinnidium(see also Tintinnidium)
Parallelostrombidium 69 1.5 50,54,69
Paramecium 39,146 Prymnesium parvum 91,103 Semitintinnidium semiciliatum (see also
Paramecium trichium 146 Pseudobodo cf. tremulans 89 Tintinnidium semiciliatum) 50,55,
Parapetalotricha 79 Pseudocalanus 135,140 69
Parapetalotricha entzi 79 Pseudocalanus newmani 126 Sergestes similis 127
Paraphysomonas sp. 89 Pseudochirella polyspina 126 Seriphus politus 132
Parastrombidinopsis 52,69,81 Pseudometacylis 80 Solea ovata 132
Parastrombidium 52,69,81,83 Pseudomicrothorax 35 Solea solea 132
Paratontonia 69 Pseudopfi esteria 161 Solea variegata 132
Parophrys vetulus 131 Pseudopfi esteria shumwayae 161 Spiromonas gonderi 146
Parundella 80,82,173,216,218 Pseudopleuronectes americanus 131 Spirostrombidium 69
Parundella caudata 131 Pseudotontonia 69 Spirotontonia 69
Parundella messinensis 7,Plate 1.5 Ptychocylis 80,216,220,223 Spiroxystonella 79,80,81
Parvilucifera 161 Ptychocylis acuta Plate 10.1 Spiroxystonella scandens 79
Paulsenella vostonochi 161 Ptychocylis obtusa 40 Spongodrymus 124
Pavlova lutheri 180 Sprattus sprattus 130
Pelagohalteria 69,81 Rhabdonella 21,32,36,37,39,72,73, Steenstrupiella 18,32,72,80,166,216,
Pelagostrobilidium 69,81,82,99,100 76,80,166,216,221 218
Pelagostrobilidium spirale 88,108 Rhabdonella brandti 73 Steenstrupiella steenstrupii 73,220,
Pelagostrombidium 69,181,184 Rhabdonella cornucopia 241 225,241,Plate 10.2
Pelagostrombidium fallax 173 Rhabdonella hebe 73,74 Stelidiella 80

292 Organism index
Stenosemella 21,23,30,32,36,39,53, Tiarina fusus 201 Tintinnopsis nucula 147,148
61,63,72,73,76,79,80,129, Tintinnidium 4,6,30,32,36,39,44,45, Tintinnopsis nudicauda 226
131,132,139,141,166,216,219, 50,53–55,61,69,72–75,80,83, Tintinnopsis panamensis 166,167
220,234 124,216,219,220,Plate 1.4 Tintinnopsis parva 32,125
Stenosemella lacustris 30,48,56,61, Tintinnidium fl uviatile 30,32,48,50, Tintinnopsis parvula 18,32,34,48,
62,69,75,83 53,55 60
Stenosemella nivalis 72,74,124,129, Tintinnidium inquilinum 109 Tintinnopsis radix 6,37,74,166,167,
147–149,156,166,239 Tintinnidium muciocola 124 Plate 1.4
Stenosemella nucula 130 Tintinnidium pusillum 30,48,50,53, Tintinnopsis rapa 39
Stenosemella pacifi ca 18,39,61,62,69 55,59 Tintinnopsis spiralis 6,Plate 1.4
Stenosemella ventricosa 34,35,37,47, Tintinnidium semiciliatum 48,50,53, Tintinnopsis subacuta 74,166,167
48,72,74,125,130,Plate 1.4, 55,59 Tintinnopsis tocantinensis 72,74
Plate 2.2 Tintinnophagus 134,148,161 Tintinnopsis tubulosa 92,124,125,
Sticholonche zanclea 164 Tintinnophagus acutus 148,155,156, 133,210
Stoeckeria 161 158,160–163,166,Plate 6.4 Tintinnopsis tubulosoides 48,72,74,
Stolephorus purpureus 130 Tintinnopsis 4,21–24,27,29,30,32, 91
Stomolophus meleagris 128 35–37,44,45,56,55,61,64,69, Tintinnopsis uruguayensis 72,74
Strobilidium 3,45,46,49,69,136,137, 70,72–76,79,80,82,83,98,100, Tintinnopsis vasculum 89,91,96,103,
141 112,124,128–134,136,140,166, 106,113
Strobilidium spiralis 88 173,174,184,208,215,216,219, Tintinnopsis wangi 39
Strombidinopsis 3,19,44–46,49,51,52, 220,233,234 Tintinnus 7,44,80
69,81,82,83,100 Tintinnopsis acuminata 96,103,106, Tintinnus helix (see also Coxiella helix)
Strombidinopsis minima 53 113,124 147,158
Strombidium 3,44–46,49,69,81–83, Tintinnopsis ampla 40 Tintinnus inquilinus (see also Eutintinnus
88,136,139,212 Tintinnopsis beroidea 36,40,76,83, inquilinus) 4,44
Strombidium biarmatum 173 100,101,124,125,131,133,174, Tintinnus subulatus 125
Strombidium chlorophilum 175 183,229,239,Plate 7.1 Tontonia 49,69,81
Strombidium capitatum 173,184 Tintinnopsis brasiliensis 48,59,61,69, Tontonnia appendiculariformis 52
Strombidium conicum 173,176,177, 75,125 Tortanus 135
179,180–182,184 Tintinnopsis bütschlii 27 Tortanus setacaudatus 126
Strombidium crassulum 173,184 Tintinnopsis campanula 3,30,31,48, Trachurus symmetricus 129
Strombidium oculatum 176,178,181 147,148,152,156,157,166,Plate Trichoda inquilinus 4,5,44
Strombidium reticulatum 114 1.4 Trichodesmium 213, Plate 9.5
Strombidium sulcatum 108–110 Tintinnopsiscompressa 36 Trisopterus luscus 130
Stylicauda 79,80,219 Tintinnopsis corniger (see also
Stylicauda platensis 166,167,216 Rhizodomus tagatzi) 79,174,226, Uca 133
Stylonychia 46,49 227,Plate 7.1 Undella 19,33,36,79,80,216,223
Synchaeta vorax 129 Tintinnopsis cylindrata 18,32,48,53, Undella hyalina 7,Plate 1.5
Syndinium 163 54,55,56,61,69 Undellopsis 80,216,223
Synechococcus 12,89,98,209 Tintinnopsis cylindrica 36,37,48,62,
Syngnathus 132 72–74,148,156,166,Plate 2.1, Varistrombidium 69
Plate 6.4 Vasicola 44
Telotrochidium 35 Tintinnopsis dadayi 74,88–91,96,103,
Tetrahymena 146 106,Plate 1.4 Wailesia 80
Thalassiosira 89,97,109,140 Tintinnopsis directa 179 Wangiella 76,80
Thalassiosira constricta 89 Tintinnopsis fi mbriata 48,62,196
Thalassiosira oceanica 89 Tintinnopsis karajensis 226,239 Xystonella 32,79–81,166,216,223,
Thalassiosira pseudonana 89 Tintinnopsis kofoidi (see also T. cylindrica) 224
Thallassomyces 161,163 174,179,210,Plate 7.1 Xystonella lohmanni 148,166
Thysanoessa inermis 126 Tintinnopsis levigata 36 Xystonella treforti 241
Thysanoessa longicaudata 126 Tintinnopsis lobiancoi 33,37,40 Xystonellopsis 80,216,220,223
Thysanoessa longipes 126 Tintinnopsis lohmanni 74 Xystonellopsis paradoxa 7,Plate 1.5
Thysanoessa macrura 126 Tintinnopsis major 47,166,167
Thysanoessa raschii 126 Tintinnopsis minuta 124,208 Zeugopterus norvegicus 132
Thysanoessa tricuspidata 126 Tintinnopsis nana 208 Zoothamnium 172

Subject Index
acantharian feeding 134 ballast water 172, 224, 226, 227 chemoreception 98
accessory combs 47, 53 basal body 22, 45, 46, 49, 51–56, 61, chitin 35–37, 41, 89, 97, 109, 173
acritarchs 14, 187, 189, 191 64–67, 69, 81 chitinase digestion 37, 41
adoral membranelles 19, 22, 23, 46, 47, basal body chloroplast 161, 201, 202, 212, 213
64, 65, 69, 86, 88, 92, 100, 110, parasites 149, 150 choreotrich 2, 3, 4, 13, 16, 19, 23,
117 behavior 44–47, 49, 51, 52, 53, 63, 69, 81,
adoral zone of membranelles 22–24, 31, swimming/feeding and parasitism 147 82, 83, 92, 117, 138, 140, 141,
31, 45, 46, 49, 51, 52, 56, 64, 65, benthic 13, 41, 49, 64, 81, 123, 132, 143, 201, 212
68, 81, 86 139, 169, 180, 187, 192, 212, chromosome 148, 158, 161, Plate 6.4
Agassiz Expedition 8, 9 229 ciliary pattern 23, 32, 41, 45, 49, 51,
agglomerated lorica 4, 6, 18, 19, 20, benthic invertebrate feeding 139, 140, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 61, 62,
29–33, 35–37, 39, 40, 41, 44, 45, 142–144, 183 63, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 82, 83
47, 48, 53, 59, 61, 64, 66, 69, 72, biochronology 192 cingulum 147, 160
74, 75, 79, 83, 205 biomass 8, 9, 11, 12, 95, 96, 101, 102, cladistic analysis 32, 43, 44, 46, 49, 52,
agglutinated lorica 4, 6, 140, 187, 189, 103, 105, 106, 107, 108, 113, 53, 61, 63, 64, 68, 70, 75, 81, 83
192, 195, 195, 196, 216, 220, 120, 121, 123, 134, 135, 136, cladoceran feeding 129, 137, 138
233, 234, 239, 242 138, 143, 165, 168, 169, classifi cation 18, 21, 30, 31, 32, 35, 41,
allometric 104, 200, 202, 203, 204 199–202, 205–209 43, 45, 46, 47, 69, 74, 75, 76,
aloricate ciliates 19, 23, 44–47, 49, 52, bivalve feeding120, 132, 139, 142, 144, 79, 80, 83, 146, 192, 196, 197,
53, 81, 82, 83, 88, 108, 123, 183 199
133, 134–144, 164, 169, 172, Blastodiniphyceae 160 clearance rate 88, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96,
183, 201, 202, 207, 209, 210, buccal membranelles 49, 51, 52, 65 97, 110, 123, 135, 136, 137,
212, 243 buoyancy 211 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 208,
appendicularian feeding 11, 128, 137 209, 210
archaea 37, 39, 41 calcispheres 191 closing apparatus 20, 61, 64, 66, 69, 73,
assimilation effi ciency 102, 105, 106, calcite 13, 191, 192 76, 83, 189
107, 108, 119, 120, 121 Calpionellids 13, 191, 192, 195, 197 cnidarian feeding 123, 127, 136, 141
athecate dinofl agellates 123, 156 Cambrian period 187 coastal environments 4, 8, 10, 29, 30,
attachment 141, 142 capsules 47, 53, 61, 63, 66, 72, 83, 92 102, 133, 135, 138, 142, 143,
azaspiracids 143 cell cortex 49 144, 165, 169, 172, 175, 176,
cell division 2, 4, 20–22, 26, 29, 30, 41, 177, 180, 182, 183, 184, 200,
bacteria 11, 12, 37, 39, 41, 93, 97, 116, 46, 49, 51, 61, 79, 99, 100, 148 202, 230, 204–207, 208,
146, 172, 181, 182, 203, 208, Cenozoic era 192 211–213, 215, 216, 219, 220,
229 chaetognath feeding 11, 128, 136, 137, 226, 229, 233–239, 241–243
bacterioplankton 11, 199, 204 143 coccolithophore 4, 6, 19, 187, 216, 230,
bacterivore 11, 12, 201, 207 Challenger Expedition 8 231, 233, 242
The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton, First Edition. Edited by John R. Dolan,
David J.S. Montagnes, Sabine Agatha, D. Wayne Coats, and Diane K. Stoecker.
© 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
293

294 Subject index
collarmembranelles22, 25, 44, 47, 49, dinospore(s) 149, 150, 155–158, 160, fi rst-feeding fi sh larvae138, 129–132,
51, 52–54, 57, 61, 65, 81 161, Plate 6.4 143, 144
comb jelly feeding 123, 136, 137 Dinozoa 160 fi sh 8, 10, 11, 136, 137, 138, 143, 22
conjugation 2, 3, 22, 49, 61, 69, 82, 99, distribution fi sh larvae12, 123, 136, 137–139, 142,
100, 105, 116, 118, 172, 177, austral 187, 216, 220, 224, 241 144, 169, 204, 210
178, 184 boreal 187, 216, 220, 223, 241 fl agellum 149, 154
contractile organelle 3, 4, 19, 31, 47, 52, cosmopolitan 187, 216, 217, 218, longitudinal 147, 155, 156, 159
53, 66, 92 220, 224, 225, 241 transverse 147, 155, 156, 159
perinema 151 neritic 116, 187, 192, 193, 195, fl ow cytometer 203
contractility 20, 52 216–220, 223, 224, 227, fl uorescent intracytoplasmic inclusions
copepod distribution 142, 230–233, 241 233–239, 241 212
copepod feeding 123, 125, 134, 135, of cysts 182 food vacuole contents 124, 208, 210,
136, 142 of parasites 165–168 213
coxliella form 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 77, 79, warm water 187, 192, 216, 225 food vacuole(s) parasite 151–156
81 distribution–abundance relation food web 2, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 86, 93,
Cretaceous period 191, 192, 193 227–229 97, 104, 120, 121, 133, 134,
crinoid feeding 133, 140 diversity 137, 139, 140, 169, 200,
crustacean zooplankton feeding 126, molecular 70, 75, 196 201–204, 208, 224
134–136, 141, 184, 204 parasites 160, 161–166 foraminifera 2, 10, 35, 124, 134, 187,
ctenophore feeding 11, 123, 128, 136, sequence 70, 161–166, 196 195, 216, 220, 230, 241
137, 141, 142, 224 effects of parasitism 169 foraminiferan feeding 124, 134, 140
cyrtos 65 effects of predation 143 functional response 93–99, 101, 102,
cyanobacteria 121, 212, 231 dominant species 184, 239 105–107, 110, 119, 121
cyst doubling rate 101, 142, 208, 211 fungi 146
wall 67, 173, 175, 176, 177, 181 Doushantuo formation 189, 190 fusopsis 173
cyst Duke of Orleans Arctic Expedition 8
of parasites 156, 158 gamete 178
cyst map 182 ecology fusion 148, 158–160
cytochrome-c oxidase subunit 1 (cox1) parasites 165–168 parasite 148, 158–160
70 egg production of copepods 135, 143 gametocyte 156
cytopyge 47, 86, 93 electivity indices 210 gelatinous zooplankton feeding 127, 136,
cytostome 49, 51, 65, 150, 190 encystment 99, 191, 142, 172, 173, 137, 142
176–181, 183–185 gene–protein-coding 161, 163, 164
decipiens form 26, 27, 28 endemism 224, 226 gene
Devonian period 191 endocytic algae 212 SSU 20, 46, 47, 49, 70–73, 74–76,
diarrheic shellfi sh poisoning 143 energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy 81, 83, 161–164
diatom 4, 8, 11, 12, 30, 53, 88, 89, 97, (EDX) 35–37 mitochondrial 70, 161
123, 136, 137, 139, 141, 142, enslaved chloroplasts 201 trees 35, 43, 49, 61, 63, 70, 72,
178, 187, 201, 210, 211, 216, Eocene epoch 192, 195 73, 74, 76, 83, 161, 163, 164,
224, 230–233, 237, 238, 242, epibiont 201, 212 169
243 epilorica 25–30, 41 generation time (see also doubling time)
diatom bloom 211 episome 147, 149–156, 158, 160 115, 202, 213, 224
digest/digestion 86, 93, 108, 114, 123, equivalent spherical diameter 208 genetic analysis 32, 43, 44, 46, 75, 81,
134, 138, 141, 146, 150, 151, estuaries 114, 167, 201, 205, 233, 83
156, 203, 212 239 girdle 149, 156, 158
dikinetids 49–59, 61, 63, 65, 66, 69, 76, euglenoid(s) 137, 146 girdle kinety 65, 66, 68, 82
81, 82 euphausiid 126, 136, 210 granules 53, 79
dilution method 182, 203, 210 excystment 100, 172, 176–185 lorica forming 20–23, 26, 28, 39, 41
dimorphism 67 extrusomes 19, 39, 53, 66, 92 granulite 188
Dinofl agellata 160 eyespot(s) grazing 11, 12, 86, 97, 98, 100, 104,
dinofl agellate 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 20, 88, parasite 156, 158, 160, Plate 6.4 110, 113, 118–120, 123, 135,
92, 93, 98, 109, 111, 120, 123, 139, 142, 144, 167, 200–204,
124, 133, 134, 135, 136–139, favella form 26–28, 76 208–210, 212
143, 144, 146–170, 172, 173, fecal pellet 40, 41, 107, 146 gross growth effi ciency 105–106, 121,
176, 178, 180, 182–184, 201, fecal pellet contents 40, 123, 125, 126, 204
202, 204–212, 216, 220, 224, 128, 134, 135, 144, 210 growth 14, 29, 89–91, 99–108,
230, 232, 237, 239, 241 feeding (tintinnid) 2–4, 7, 8, 12, 19, 44, 112–114, 117–121
dinofl agellate blooms 143 49, 81, 86–99, 110, 113, 121, gut contents 123, 125–133, 136–144
Dinokaryota 148, 155, 158, 160 150, 209, 211 gut fl uorescence method 203
dinokont 147, 149, 151, 152, 154, 155, feeding tube 20, 158
159, 160, Plate 6.3 femtoplankton 199 harmful algae 98, 121, 143–144
Dinophyceae 89, 155 fi lter feeding 211 herring food web 8, 10, 140

Subject index 295
heterotrophic dinofl agellate 133, 134, lipids 35, 39 nuclear apparatus 45, 49
136, 144, 146, 201, 206, 210 long-branch attraction 82, 163 nucleic acids 202
heterotrophic nanofl agellates 11, 12, 97, lorica 17–41 nucleolus
203, 209 lorica material 19, 21–31, 36, 39, 41 parasite 148, 152, Plate 6.1
heterotrophy 202, 212 lorica oral diameter 95–97, 238–240, nucleus
high-resolution transmission electron 243 dinokaryotic 156
microscopy 36 lorica sac 19, 20, 33, 34, 61, 64, 66, 70, macronucleus (see macronucleus)
histochemical 35, 39, 41, 161 72, 73, 75, 76, 83 micronucleus (see micronucleus)
histone 161 lorica splitting 30 numerical response 101–108, 120,
Holocene epoch 14 lorica structure 31–35, 39, 41 121
host range 146, 152, 156, 165, 166 nutrient regeneration 204, 212
host specifi city 146, 152, 156, 165, 166 macronucleus 3, 22, 23, 51, 64, 66, 67,
Huangmailing formation 188, 189, 197 69, 79, 99, 146 oceanic environment 205
hyaline lorica 4, 6, 23, 35, 37, 38, 39, marine alveolate 163 Oligocene epoch 192
59, 69, 116, 133, 139 marine snow 41, 201 oligotrich 3, 4, 13, 23, 44–47, 49, 51,
hyposome 147, 149, 151–155, 158 mastigocoel 149, 151 52, 53, 63, 65–66, 68, 69, 81–83,
matrix (lorica) 30, 32, 35, 39, Plate 2.2 87, 88, 92, 98–102, 104, 108,
ichthyoplankton (see also fi sh larvae) medusae feeding 128, 136, 137, 109, 111, 114, 115, 117, 139,
123, 138–139 140–142 143, 172, 173, 175–182, 184,
infection rate, tintinnids 166–168 meiosis 69, 100, 159 201, 207, 212
infection cycle 149–156 mercuric bromophenol blue 37 operational taxonomic unit 70
ingestion 92–98, 102, 105–108, 110, meroplankton feeding 132, 133, 139 opisthe 19, 21, 22, 23, 26, 29, 30, 41,
112–114, 119, 121 Mesoproterozoic era 188, 189, 197 46, 51, 52
internal transcribed spacer sequences 70 Mesozoic era 187, 191, 192 oral apparatus 22, 46, 51, 81
interstitial 81, 212 mesozooplankton 94, 102, 119, 200, oral ciliature 33, 22, 44, 46, 49, 51, 53,
intraguild predation 205 202, 204 83, 109, 117
invagination of intracellular parasites Michaelis–Menton kinetics 93 oral primordium 2, 22, 23, 54, 57, 60,
151 microalgal bloom 211 65, 67, 78, Plate 1.1
invasive species 224 microbial loop 11, 12, 169, 208 Ordovician period 13, 187, 191
ITS2 ribotype 164 microcrustacean 10, 201 osmotrophy 150, 151
microgamete 100 ostracod feeding 129, 137
jelly plankton 123, 127–128, 137, 140, micronucleus 69, 99, 146
199, 204 microphytoplankton 199, 237, 238 Paleocene epoch 192
jumping behavior 81, 82, 92, 117, 136, microsporidia 146 Paleozoic era 187, 191, 192
141, 212 microtubule(s) 64, 69, 150, 187 palintomy 151, 154
Jurassic period 14, 192, 193, 195, 197 Millon’s solution 36 pallium feeder 201, 202
Mississippian formation 191 papula 173, 176, 177
K-adapted 212 mitosis 99, 161 paradox of the plankton 13, 14
keratin 36 mixotrophy/mixotrophic 12, 13, 133, paralorica 25–30, 41, 79, 81
kinetal map 49, 51, 54, 57, 60 135, 139, 161, 201, 202, 205, paralytic shellfi sh poisoning 143, 144
kinetids (see also dikinetids and 210, 212, 232 paraphyly 73, 76
monokinetids) 49, 52, 56, 63, 65, monokinetids 49, 52, 56, 57, 66, 69, parasite
66, 68, 82 82 distribution 165, 166
kinetoplastid 146 monolaminar 20, 21, 32, 33, 34, 37, host specifi city 152, 156
kleptoplasty 212 39, 41, 45, 56, 59, 72, 76, Plate impact on host 166–168
krill feeding 126, 136 2.2 of ciliate 146
monophyly/monophyletic 43, 63, 83, of dinofl agellate 149, 164
lamina pharyngea 151, 153, Plate 6.1 163, 164, 192 of radiolaria 164
larval fi sh (see fi sh larvae) morphogenesis 22, 23, 43, 53, 82, 187 of tintinnids 146–170
lateral ciliary fi eld 23, 56, 57, 59–62, morphotype 13, 75, 224, 238, 239, 243 prevalence 166–168
66, 72, 74, 77, 78 morula 20, 21 reproduction 149–160
latitudinal diversity gradient 229–233, most probable number method 182, 185 seasonal patterns 165, 166
241, 242 motility 88, 98, 152, 158 type
left ciliary fi eld 23, 51, 53–63, 65, 72, mucocysts 61, 66 ectoparasite 146–148, 155–157,
76 mutualism/mutualistic 146, 212 169
lepidosomes 67, 82, 173 endoparasite 146
leptite 188 nano-tintinnids 208 intracellular 146–149, 160, 164
life cycle nanozooplankton 204 parasitism 6, 7, 12, 13, 100, 116, 118,
Amoebophrya 149–151 nauplii 10, 11, 136, 139, 201, 202, 119, 134, 142, 145–171, 172,
Euduboscquella 151–155 205, 206, 208, 212 173, 184, 211, 212, 239
Tintinnophagus 158, Plate 6.4 nomen inquirendum 79, 80 parasitophorous vacuole 153
light effects 100, 113, 114, 178–180 nomina oblita 44 PCR, qPCR 70, 123

296 Subject index
peduncle radiolarian feeding 20, 124, 134 symbiotic association 212
dinofl agellate 134, 202 rare species 115, 205, 227–229, 241 synapomorphy 20, 52, 53, 56, 61, 64,
parasite 161 replication band 23, 51 75, 81, 82
tintinnid 3, 4, 19, 20, 28, 29, 31, 52, resource partitioning 239 Syndinea 148, 149, 158–165, 169
55, 66, 77, 78, 190 right ciliary fi eld 23, 51, 53–63, 65, 72, synenergide 149–151, 158
perilemma 21, 47, 52, 53, 173 76 synkaryon 69
Perilemmaphora 47 rotifer 4, 129, 137, 201, 204, 212
periodic acidic Schiff reaction 36 tectin 35
pH effects 113, 120, 121 salp feeding 128, 137 temperature
phagotrophy 207 sarcodine feeding 124, 134 cysts 177–185
Phanerozoic eon 188, 191, 193 scuticociliate 201 growth 111–113
phenotype 21, 23, 25, 26–29, 31, 215 sea anchor 88, 211 parasite 166
photosynthetic 161, 164, sea surface temperature temperature feeding 113
phylogeny 4, 12, 13, 43, 161–163, diversity 230, 233 tentaculoids 3, 19, 31, 47, 53, 66, 69,
169 seasonality 233–241 87, 92
phytoplankton 8, 9, 11–13, 100, 113, sedimentation 40, 41, 176 Tethys Seaway 192
123, 135, 136, 140, 142–144, selective feeding 92, 93, 96–98, 210 Thor Expedition 8
165, 178, 180, 182, 187, shield 151–153, 160 threshold prey concentration 102, 106,
199–205, 207–211, 215, 230, silicofl agellates 187 108
232, 233, 238, 239, 242, 243 Silurian period 191 threshold light 179
Plankton Expedition 8 sinking (see also sedimentation) 6, 40, tidal rhythm 178, 181
plankton net 2, 8, 9, 199, 201 123, 134, 211 Tithonian stage 192
planktonic food web 2, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, size selectivity 96–98 top-down control 119, 142–144
86, 93, 97, 104, 120, 121, 133, somatic ciliature 3, 21–23, 41, 44, 45, toxic algae (see also harmful algae,
134, 137, 139, 140, 169, 49, 53, 74, 81, 83, 116 paralytic shellfi sh poisoning) 111
200–204, 208, 224 somatic kineties 51–53, 56, 65–67, 69 trace metal effects 114, 181
Pleistocene epoch 192, 194, 196 South Polar Expedition 8 tracer methods 202
plesiomorphy 64, 65–67 specifi c growth rate 101–105, 211 tracer studies 202, 203, 208
polykinetids 3, 49, 64, 65, 86 spindle 152, 154, 161 Triassic period 191
polyp feeding 133, 140 spirotrich 3, 45, 46, 199, 201 trichites 53, 66
polyphyly 117, 160, 161 spore Plate 6.3, Plate 6.4 trilaminar 20, 21, 33, 39, 41
polysaccharide 35–37 anisospore 158 trophic cascade 135, 142, 204
population growth 99, 101, 102, 119, fusion 148, 158, 159 trophocyte 156, 157
184 type trophont
post-capture defense 141 fl agellated 152 parasite 148–153, 156–158, 160,
postciliary microtubules 64, 69 isospore 152 Plate 6.1, 6.2
posterior kinety 59–62, 66, 75, 76 micro/macro 147, 148, 152 tintinnid 2, 22, 25, 26, 29, 49,
Precambrian 191, 197 non-motile 152 Plate 1.1
predator 4, 6, 8, 12, 19, 22, 86, 88, 93, parasite 152 Tsagaan Oloom formation 188, 190
95, 98, 99, 102, 105–108, 120, spore as cyst 157, 173 type genus 76
123–144, 146, 155, 169, 184, sporocysts 147, 158 type species 55, 73, 74, 76, 79, 83, 148
202, 210, 211 sporocytes 153
predator defense 20, 141–142 sporogenesis 153, 156, 160 undulating membranes 49, 65, 67
pronuclei 69 SSU rRNA 20, 46, 47, 49, 69–72,
protargol staining 22, 23, 45–47, 49, 51, 74–76, 81, 83, 161, 162 vacuole, digestive, tintinnid 86, 87, 93,
54–57, 59, 60, 62, 81, 83, 167, stable isotope tracers 204 94, 110, 114, 116
175, 185, 237 stomatogenesis 51, 52, 67, 68, 81 Valanginian 192
proteinase K digestion 36 striae 47, 53, 87, 92 Van–Wisselingh test 35, 37
proteolytic 35, 39–41 succession 169, 233–241 vectors 146
proter 4, 19, 21–26, 28–30, 40, 41, 46 sulcus 147, 149, 156, 158, 160 vectors for algal toxins 143, 144
Proterozoic era 187–189, 191, 197 surrogates (prey) 208 ventral kinety 23, 56–65, 74, 76, 77,
protolorica 25–30, 41 suspension feeders 44, 49, 81, 92, 123, 78
protozooplankton 199 134, 136, 137, 139, 140, 143, ventral organelles 53–56, 63, 65, 72
pseudochitin 35 144 vermiform 149, 150
pteropod feeding 128, 136, 137 swimming 5, 6, 19, 22, 23, 30, 51, 53, vesicular reticulum 21, 53, 66, 69
pycnosis of macronucleus 67 86–88, 92, 95, 98, 106–112, virus 12, 146, 199, 229
114, 117, 120, 121, 139, 141,
Q 112, 113 142, 150, 178 zooplankton feeding 123–139
10
symbionts 146 zygote
r-adapted 212, ectosymbionts 146 cyst 178
radiolaria 10, 20, 140, 164, 187, 187 endosymbionts 146 parasite 158, 159

