TheISMEJournal(2016)10,2174–2183
©2016InternationalSocietyforMicrobialEcology Allrightsreserved 1751-7362/16
www.nature.com/ismej
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Declines in both redundant and trace species
characterize the latitudinal diversity gradient in
tintinnid ciliates
John R Dolan1, Eun Jin Yang2, Sung-Ho Kang2 and Tae Siek Rhee2
1Laboratoire d'Océanography de Villefranche-sur-Mer, CNRS, Université Pierre et Marie Curie (Paris 6)
Villefranche-sur-Mer, France and 2Department of Polar Ocean Environment, Korea Polar Research Institute,
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon, South Korea
Thelatitudinaldiversitygradientisawell-knownbiogeographicpattern.However,rarelyconsidered
is how a cline in species richness may be reflected in the characteristics of species assemblages.
Fewer species may equal fewer distinct ecological types, or declines in redundancy (species
functionally similar to one another) or fewer trace species, those occurring in very low
concentrations. We focused on tintinnid ciliates of the microzooplankton in which the ciliate cell is
housed inside a species-specific lorica or shell. The size of lorica oral aperture, the lorica oral
diameter (LOD), is correlated with a preferred prey size and maximum growth rate. Consequently,
speciesofadistinctLODaredistinctinkeyecologiccharacteristics,whereasthoseofasimilarLOD
are functionally similar or redundant species. We sampled from East Sea/Sea of Japan to the High
ArcticSea.Wedeterminedabundancedistributionsofbiologicalspeciesandalsoecologicaltypesby
groupingspeciesinLODsize-classes,setsofecologicallysimilarspecies.Inlowerlatitudesthereare
more trace species, more size-classes and the dominant species are accompanied by many
apparently ecologically similar species, presumably able to replace the dominant species, at least
withregardtothesizeofpreyexploited.Suchredundancyappearstodeclinemarkedlywithlatitude
in assemblages of tintinnid ciliates. Furthermore, the relatively small species pools of the northern
high latitude assemblagessuggest alow capacity toadaptto changingconditions.
TheISME Journal (2016) 10,2174–2183; doi:10.1038/ismej.2016.19; publishedonline18 March2016
Introduction (Willig et al., 2003). A universal explanation of the
latitudinal diversity gradient has been termed ‘The
A very wide variety of taxa, both multicellular Holy Grail of Ecology’ (Adams, 2009). Thus,
and microbial, show a latitudinal diversity gradient
although there is little agreement as to why the
(Gaston and Spicer, 2003). Typically, species rich-
gradient exists, most do acknowledge that species
nesspeaksinthetropics,oftenat~20°,dipsslightly
richness often declines with latitude (Adams, 2009).
at the equator and decreases markedly with latitude
The structure of species assemblages quite likely
both north and south. Tintinnid ciliates of the
often differs with species richness but exactly how
marine microzooplankton literally provide a text-
is difficult to predict. Declines in species richness
book example of the pattern (Gaston and Spicer,
can be reflected in various ways with different
2003). Slight variations of the pattern characterize
consequences concerning the ecological character-
other protist taxa of the marine plankton such as
istics of a species assemblage.
foraminifera (Rutherford et al., 1999) and Ceratium
Fewer species can represent a reduction in the
species of the phytoplankton (Dolan, 2011). The
overall variety or range of species within an
latitudinal diversity gradient is the oldest known
assemblage.Lessvarietyamongspeciescantranslate
biogeographic pattern and the mechanisms generat-
into a lower capacity to respond to changes in
ingithavelongbeendebatedwithdozensoftheories
resource composition or predation pressure. For
proposed,noneofwhichhasfoundwideacceptance
example, a smaller range of consumer species could
have a lower capacity to exploit changes in the size
Correspondence:JR Dolan, Laboratoired'OceanographydeVille- or qualities of available prey items. Alternatively,
franche-sur-Mer,CNRS,UniversitéPierreetMarieCurie(Paris6) lower species richness may represent only fewer
UMR 7093, Station Zoologique, B.P. 28, 06230 Villefranche- forms present in very low concentrations, outside
sur-Mer,France. their usual habitat, members of the ‘accidental
E-mail:dolan@obs-vlfr.fr biosphere’ (Weisse, 2014). These species likely have
Received 29 April 2015; Received 26 November 2015; accepted
12January2016;publishedonline18March2016 low actual or potential ecological impact. Besides a

Highlatitudeassemblages
JRDolanetal
2175
decline in variety, lower species richness may Critically, LOD, analogous to gape-size, is related
translate into fewer presumptive redundant species to both the size of the food items ingested and
(that is, species of similar ecological characteristics) maximum growth rate. The largest prey item
able to replace dominant species subject to a high ingested is ~0.5 the LOD in longest dimension and
specific mortality. Theoretically, the presence of a given species feeds most efficiently on prey ~0.25
redundant species should increase the resilence of of its LOD in size. LOD is negatively related to
anassemblage,meaningitscapacitytoresistperturba- maximum growth rate. This is because LOD is
tionandsurvivechangesinconditions(Naeem,1998). positivelyrelatedtothevolumeofthecelloccupying
Recent studies have re-emphasized the tremen- the lorica (Dolan, 2010) and tintinnids follow the
dous diversity of protists in the marine plankton common inverse relationship between cell size and
(de Vargas et al., 2015). The phylogenetic diversity maximum specific growth rate (Montagnes, 2013).
and extreme ecological complexity of protistan TintinnidspecieswithasimilarLOD,ormouthsize,
assemblages makes assessing how assemblages are are usually similar in terms of both preferred prey
structured a daunting task (for example, Lima- size and maximum growth rate; here these simila-
Mendez et al., 2015). Among planktonic protists, rities are taken as indicating ecological redundancy.
tintinnids are an example of a phylogenetically and The structure of tintinnid populations, in terms
ecologicallycoherentgroupandsorepresentataxon of both species abundance distributions and distribu-
in which study of the structure of assemblages tions of species grouped in size-classes, has
are considerably simplified. Tintinnid ciliates also been characterized for the species-rich assemblages
represent an ideal group to examine with regard to of tropical, sub-tropical and temperate systems
the question of how the structure of species (Dolan et al., 2007, 2013). Typically in these
assemblages varies with latitude. This is because systems, dozens of species can be found in material
not only do they show a typical latitudinal diversity from 10 to 20l (Dolan and Stoeck, 2011). In general,
gradient but also the population structure of tempe- species abundance distributions are log-series or log-
rate, sub-tropical and tropical populations are well normal distributions, whereas grouping forms by size-
known and species of similar ecology share similar classesratherthanspeciesyieldsageometricdistribu-
morphologies allowing identification of ecologically tion(Dolanetal.,2007,2013).Assemblagesareoverall
redundant species. structured by ‘mouth size’. Typically there are 4–10
Tintinnid ciliates are characterized by the posses- abundantspeciesandtheseareofmouthsizesdistinct
sion of a shell or lorica whose architecture and from one another. The other species, of markedly less
dimensions form the basis of classic taxonomic abundance,canbedividedintotwogroups.Thefirstis
schemes (Figure 1). About 1200 species are in composed of those with mouth sizes similar to one of
the literature (Agatha and Strüder-Kypke, 2012); thedominantspecies;theseareecologicallyredundant
virtually all are restricted to the marine plankton. forms. The second group is formed of species in LOD
The diameter of the mouth-end of the lorica, lorica size-classes distinct from those of the dominants and
oral diameter (LOD), is a conservative taxonomic these species appear to be occasional, ephemeral, or
character (Laval-Peuto and Brownlee, 1986). It does rare species (Dolan et al., 2009) and are generally
not change with development; newly divided cells presentinverylowconcentrations(Dolanetal.,2013).
formanewloricawiththesameoraldiameterasthe However, it is important to note that the categories of
fully developed organism (Agatha et al., 2013). ‘redundant’ and trace or ‘rare’ are not exclusive. If a
species found intrace concentrations is in a size-class
with other species, then it is both redundant and rare
while if alone in a size-class then it is not redundant
butrarewithecologicalcharacteristicsdistinctfromall
the other species.
Tropical, sub-tropical and temperate assemblages
are characterised by high species richness reflecting
both considerable species redundancy as well as the
presence of species with morphologies distinct from
abundant forms but found in low concentrations. In
thisstudyweaddressthequestionofhowsub-arctic
and arctic communities with lower species richness
are structured compared with well-studied tempe-
rate communities.
We characterized communities along a latitudinal
gradient of decreasing species richness. We examined
large-scale or metapopulation characteristics in terms
of species and in terms of 'ecotypes', defined here as
species of similar feeding ecology and maximum
Figure 1 Salpingella acuminata. Image of a specimen from
growth rate based on LOD or mouth size. In 2012
station 10 in the Bering Sea showing the basic features of a
tintinnidciliate. we sampled populations of the East Sea/Sea of Japan,
TheISMEJournal

Highlatitudeassemblages
JRDolanetal
2176
the North Pacific Ocean, the Bering Sea and the asshowninFigure1.ExactlocationsandtheKorean
Chukchi Sea and the High Arctic along a transect of Polar Research Station Designations are given in the
over 43° of latitude and 5000 km (Figure 2). Notably supplementary data file. A Niskin bottle rosette
the year 2012 was a year of record low sea ice extent equipped with CTD probes was used to obtain
permitting open water sampling of plankton in the temperature profile data and discrete depth samples
High Arctic, to our knowledge for the first time. For for chlorophyll determinations. Plankton net tows
each system two to six stations were sampled provid- wereperformedtoassessmicroplanktoncommunity
ing at least 2000 ciliate cells representing each composition.
assemblage. The parameters estimated for each of the For chlorophyll a determinations, water samples
five populations were species richness, number of of 0.3–1l were obtained from 7 to 9 discrete depths
tracespecies(foundasasinglecell),numberofmouth betweenthesurfaceand100mdepth.Watersamples
size-classes, proportion of size-classes with multiple were filtered through a 0.7μm Whatman glass fiber
occupants (containing more than one species) and the filter (GF/F) and chlorophyll concentrations deter-
number of apparently redundant species. For each mined onboard using a Turner Designs Trilogy
assemblagetheobservedpatternofspeciesabundance model fluorometer calibrated using commercial
distribution was compared with modeled abundance chlorophyll a standards.
curves constructed using parameters of the particular Net tows were made with a 20μm mesh plankton
assemblage for three common models of community net of 0.45m diameter towed from 100m depth
organization: geometric, log-normal and log-series. to the surface, except at some shallow stations
Substituting size-class of oral diameter for 'species', sampled from 50 or 30m depth. A portion of the
wealsodeterminedsize-classabundancedistributions. net tow material was fixed with Lugol’s fixative
solution (2% final concentration) for direct micro-
scopic examination. In the laboratory, multiple
Materials and methods 1–2ml aliquots of net tow material were diluted
and examined in 3ml settling chambers using an
Sampling and sample analysis inverted microscope equipped with differential
Data and samples were collected from onboard interference contrast optics. The entire surface of
the Korean Research Icebreaker Araon from July to the settling chamber was examined at ×200 total
September in 2012. Data presented here are from 22 magnification. Tintinnid identifications were made
stationsdistributedbetweentheJapanSeaand82°N based on lorica morphology and following
Figure2 LocationssampledbetweenlateJulyandearlySeptemberin2012rangingfromtheEastSea/SeaofJapan(1and2),acrossthe
NorthPacific(3–8),theBeringSea(9–12),theChukchiSea(A–F)andtheHighArctic(GandH).Thesummerof2012wastheyearof
recordlowseaiceextentallowingsamplingintheHighArcticSea.Seesupplementarydatafileforexactstationlocationsandsummary
stationdata.
TheISMEJournal

Highlatitudeassemblages
JRDolanetal
2177
Kofoid and Campbell (1929, 1939) and Hada (1937). The observed rank abundance distributions were
We adopted a conservative approach, distinguishing compared with the hypothetical models using
all forms corresponding to species currently recog- a Bayesian approach: an Akaike goodness of fit
nized as valid. Species names, occurrences and LOD calculation (19). Using this approach, an Akaike
diameters assigned are given in the supplementary Information Criterion was determined as the natural
datafile.Aspreviouslydescribedandjustified(Dolan logarithmofthemean(sumdividedbyS)ofsquared
et al., 2006, 2007, 2009, 2013), species of similar deviations between observed and predicted in
ecologyintermsofpreferredpreysizeandmaximum (relative abundance) for all ranked S species plus
growth rate were grouped based on (LOD). Each an additional term to correct for the number of
specieswasassignedtheaveragedimensionsreported estimated parameters, k (1 for geometric series and
inKofoidandCampbell(1929,1939)andHada(1937). 2 each for log-series and log-normal distributions):
Size-class diameters were binned over 4μm intervals (S+k)/(S−k−2). The lower the calculated Akaike
beginning with the overall smallest diameter (11μm) Information Criterion value, the better the fit.
andcontinuingtothelargestdiameterencounteredin A difference of 1 in Akaike Information Criterion
a given sample. corresponds roughly to a 1.5 evidence ratio; we
Total sample volumes examined varied, depend- considered that a minimum difference of 1.0
ing on the concentrations of organisms, and the between Akaike Information Criterion values was
dilutions employed varied according to concentra- required to represent a significantly different fit
tions of phytoplankton. However, multiple aliquots following Burnham and Anderson (2002).
were examined until material from at least 100liters
filtered by the net was analyzed for each station.
Nominal concentrations of organisms (given in the Results and discussion
supplementary file) were calculated based on the
volume filtered by the net (calculated from net The expected latitudinal decline of species richness
surface area and depth of the strata sampled) and was evident. In the East Sea/Sea of Japan species
thevolumeofnettowmaterialexamined.Itshouldbe richnesswasmuchhigherthaninthehigherlatitude
noted that the concentrations reported here are the systems. The East Sea/Sea of Japan also had higher
average values per liter for the portion of the water cell and chlorophyll a concentrations. However,
column sampled, for most stations the top 100m. plotting individual station data showed the decline
inspeciesrichnessacrossthefivesystemstobemore
closely relatable to sea surface temperature rather
Data analysis than latitude, and independent of the abundance of
Tintinnid assemblages were characterized by pooling tintinnid cells or chlorophyll concentrations
data by system: East Sea/Sea of Japan stations 1–2; (Figure 3).
North Pacific stations 3–8; Bering Sea stations 9–12, The dominant species in each assemblage (shown
Chukchi Sea stations A–F and the High Arctic Sea in Supplementary Figure 1) were small-mouthed
stations G–H. The parameters estimated for each of species,Proplectellaexpolita, Condonellopsisfrigida,
thefivepopulationswerespeciesrichness,numberof Acanthostomella norvegica except in the North
tracespecies(foundasasinglecell),numberofmouth Pacific where the relatively large-mouthed Ptycho-
size-classes, proportion of size-classes containing cylis obtusa dominated. In each assemblage, the
more than one species (multiple occupants) and the dominant species accounted for 45–86% of the cells
number of apparently redundant species. We used encountered (Table 2). Overall, of the 31 species
simplelinearcorrelationanalysistoexaminerelation- found most (25) were not widely distributed but
shipsacrossallstationsbetweenspeciesrichnessand rather found in only in one or two of the systems
latitude, water temperature, organismal concentra- sampled. In contrast, four species were found in all
tions and chlorophyll a concentrations. five populations sampled. These widespread forms
For each assemblage we examined the patterns of werefourofthesixspeciesfoundintheHighArctic
both species abundance distribution and the abun- Sea. Thus, the few species found in the High Arctic
dance distributions of LOD size-classes. We first are mostly the widely distributed forms (for details
made log-rank abundance curves by calculating distributions of each species distributions see the
relative abundance for each species and ranking supplementary data file ‘species data’).
species from highest to lowest and plotting ln The populations in the East Sea/Sea of Japan
(relative abundance) vs rank. Then, we constructed differed considerably from all of the high latitude
hypothetical log-rank abundance curves that could assemblages (Table 1). Overall species richness was
fit the data by using parameters of the particular similar to that reported for stations from the
assemblage. We produced curves for three common California Current system in the Eastern Pacific at
modelsofcommunityorganization:geometricseries, about the same latitude (Dolan et al., 2013). The 25
log-series and log-normal, as in several previous speciesoftheEastSea/SeaofJapanassemblagewere
studies (Raybaud et al., 2009; Claessens et al., 2010; distributed in 11 size-classes, most of which were
Doherty et al., 2010; Dolan et al., 2007, 2009, 2013; occupied by more than one species. Thus, a large
Dolan and Stoeck, 2011). portion of the species pool was composed of
TheISMEJournal

Highlatitudeassemblages
JRDolanetal
2178
Figure 3 Relationship of species richness of the tintinnid assemblages to: latitude, sea surface temperature (top 10m), average
chlorophyll concentration (top 100m), andthe abundance of tintinnids. Therewere significant(Po0.01) negativelinear relationships
betweenspeciesrichnessandlatitude(r=0.6,n=21)andseasurfacetemperature(r=0.81,n=20).ES/SJindicatesEastSea/SeaofJapan.
Seesupplementarydatafileforthedata.
Table1 Summaryofdatabyregion
Region Cellsenumerated Species Tracespecies Size-classes Size-classesco-habitated Redundantspp
EastSea/SeaofJapan 2203 25 5 11 7(63%) 14
NorthPacific 2566 13 4 8 4(50%) 5
BeringSea 2255 13 2 9 3(33%) 6
ChukchiSea 2038 8 1 7 1(14%) 1
HighArctic 2496 6 0 6 0(0%) 0
Tracespeciesarespeciesfoundasasingleindividual.Numberofsize-classescontainingmorethanonespeciesgivenassize-classesco-habitated.
Numberofredundantspeciesisthenumberofspeciesinexcessofthenumberofsize-classes.
‘ecological redundants’, species occupying a size- assemblage resembled that of the North Pacific in
classalongwithoneormoreotherspecies.Thesize- species richness. The assemblage formed nine size-
class containing the largest number of species was classes with the dominant species, Codonellopsis
that of the dominant species, Proplectella expolita, frigida, sharing a size-class with two redundant
which was accompanied by three other species. The species. Two other redundant species shared the
five rare or ‘trace’ species (those found as a single size-class of the second most abundant species
individual) were redundants with one exception. Parafavella parumdentata. The two trace species
Thus, only one rare form was distinct from all other were alone in their size-class.
species in terms of mouth size. Low species richness characterised both Arctic
Compared with the East Sea/Sea of Japan, the assemblages (Table 1). In the Chukchi Sea the eight
North Pacific assemblage was composed of fewer species found were distributed in seven size-classes
species and these were distributed in fewer size- with only the size-class of the dominant species,
classes (Table 1). Half the size-classes contained Acanthostomella norvegica, containing a redundant
redundantsastheywere occupied bymore than one species. The single trace species was alone in its
species. The dominant species, the large-mouthed size-class. The High Arctic population, dominated
Pytchocylis obtusa, was alone in its size-class. None byPtychocylisobtusa,wassingularinhavingneither
of the trace species formed a distinct size-class, rare species nor redundant species; all six species
all appeared to be redundants. The Bering Sea found were in distinct size-classes. The latitudinal
TheISMEJournal

Highlatitudeassemblages
JRDolanetal
2179
decline in species richness we found from the East ‘species’ is genetically distinct from that in the High
Sea/Sea of Japan to the High Arctic represented Arctic would not change species inventories or
declines in numbers of redundant and trace species. distributions for the geographically distinct assem-
Notably, although there were many fewer species in blages. Given that cryptic forms of tintinnids appear
the high latitudes, the total overall size range of tobesegregatedeithertemporally,thatis,seasonally
LODs found in the assemblages, 11–75μm, was (Xu et al., 2012) or spatially, that is, distinct water
invariant across all the assemblages. masses (Santoferrara et al., 2015), they are unlikely
The data reported here are from a summer time to represent hidden diversity within an assemblage.
sampling as is the case for most studies of high Hence, in comparing assemblages from different
latitude plankton. In lower latitude coastal systems systems the true problematic phenomenon is poly-
seasonal changes in species richness of tintinnid morphismthatmayinflateapparentspeciesrichness
assemblages are well documented and summer is of an assemblage. If the five Parafavella species
usually a period of low diversity (reviewed in Dolan distinguished here (all found in low numbers: 1–5
and Pierce, 2013). Few data exist concerning cells per assemblage, see Supplementary data file)
seasonality in open water systems, especially in are revealed to be a single species, the species
arctic and sub-arctic waters owing to the technical richness of the assemblages of the East Sea/Sea of
difficultyofsamplinginperiodsotherthansummer. Japan, North Pacific and Bering Sea may be slightly
The gradient we found may be more prominent in lower than the numbers reported here.
other seasons, for example, when the ice cover is Besides species richness, differences between the
maximal in the Chukchi Sea and High Arctic. EastSea/SeaofJapanassemblageandhigherlatitude
Also worth noting is that rather than harboring populationswerealsoevidentinthestructuresofthe
cryptic species, some species of the high latitude assemblages. The patterns of species abundance
assemblages have long been suspected to be poly- distributions as well as the abundance distributions
morphic, having variable loricas, which perhaps of size-classes differed among the assemblages
have been designated wrongly as distinct species. (Table 2 and Figure 4). Species abundance distribu-
Among these suspected polymorphs are Parafavella tions of most of the high latitude populations were
spp (Burkovsky 1973; Davis 1978) of which five are best fit by a geometric distribution in contrast to
reported here (see Supplementary data file). The the log-series distribution of the East Sea/Sea of
phenomenonof cryptic speciesin tintinnids (that is, Japan (Table 3). For the High Arctic population no
Santoferrara et al., 2015) may be less common single distribution pattern provided a significantly
compared with polymorphism as there are species better fit.
known to display different lorica morphologies, but Long-tailed log or log-series distributions, with
of the same LOD, previously described as different large numbers of relatively rare species, are com-
species and/or genera (that is, Laval-Peuto, 1983; monly observed for most natural assemblages
Kim et al., 2013; Bachy et al., 2012). At present it is (McGill et al., 2007). Long-tailed distributions are
not clear which phenomenon is more common. typical of abundance curves of planktonic protists
Among tintinnids and foraminfera cryptic species determined using molecular techniques (for exam-
are generally segregated either temporally or spa- ple, Brown et al., 2009; Edgcomb et al., 2011; Orsi
tially (for example, de Vargas et al., 1999; Xu et al., et al., 2012; Bachy et al., 2013). Notably, the pattern
2012; Santoferrara et al., 2015), whereas in poly- can be partially the result of problems arising from
morphic species the different morphotypes occur sequencing errors and differential sequencing of
together (for example, Dolan et al., 2013, 2014; different taxa, issues which require attention (for
Dolan, 2015). example, de Vargas et al., 2015).
The most likely candidates for crypticism are The species abundance distribution of the East
the widespread species, those found from the Sea/Sea of Japan assemblage was best fit by a log
East Sea/Sea of Japan to the high Arctic such as model(Table3). Logdistributions,either log-normal
Ptychocylis obtusa and Acanthostomella norvegica. or log-series are associated with a multitude of
These species inhabit waters ranging in temperature factors governing relative species abundance in the
from 20° to −2°C. However whether or not, for caseofthelog-normal,orimmigrationandextinction
example, an East Sea/Sea of Japan population of a from a metapopulation in the case of log-series
Table2 Identityofthedominantspeciesintheassemblages
Region Dominantspecies %totalcells No.otherspeciesintheirsize-class Apparentrange
EastSea/SeaofJapan Proplectellaexpolita 65 3 EastSea/SeaofJapanonly
NorthPacific Ptychocylisobtusa 45 0 All
BeringSea Codonellopsisfrigida 45 2 AllbutHighArctic
ChukchiSea Acanthostomellanorvegica 52 1 All
HighArctic Ptychocylisobtusa 86 0 All
Notethatdominantsaccountedforalargeportionofthepopulationinall5systemsandmosthadawideapparentrange.
TheISMEJournal

Highlatitudeassemblages
JRDolanetal
2180
(that is, Hubbell, 2001). Substituting size-classes for Rare species, although low in abundance, may have
species, similar differences were evident as the log- important roles if they possess key functional traits
normal distribution of the East Sea/Sea of Japan differentfromabundantspecies(Mouillotetal.,2013).
population contrasted with the mostly geometric Intheprotistan‘rarebiosphere’,rarespeciesmaybeof
distributions of the high latitude assemblages importance because they can become abundant if
(Table 3). A geometric distribution represents the conditions change favoring different species with
result of a priority exploitation of resources by certain characteristics (Caron and Countway, 2009).
individualspeciesinacommunityandisclassically Admittedly, rare species can also be of minor
associated with 'immature' or pioneer communities ecologicalimportance,asinmembersofthe‘acciden-
limited by a single resource such as space (for tal rare biosphere’ (Weisse, 2014). Regardless of the
example, Whittaker, 1972). This distribution is also nature of the rare tintinnid species we found, their
thought to characterize assemblages of low species numbersdecreasedmarkedlywithlatitude(Figure5).
richness or severe environments (Wilson, 1991). In
Antarctic waters, a geometric species abundance
distribution was found to describe the species
abundance distribution of the entire planktonic Table3 Resultsofmodelingabundancedistributionpatterns
ciliate community (Wickham et al., 2011). In
tintinnid assemblages, the geometric distribution of Region Log-normal Geometric Log-series
LOD size-class abundance is most simply attributa-
ble to availability of prey concentration and size Speciesabundancedistributionfits
EastSea/SeaofJapan 3.2 5.8 2.7
given the close relationship between LOD size and
NorthPacific 3.8 1.9 3.9
prey exploited by tintinnids (Dolan, 2010). BeringSea 3.3 0.0 3.4
The species found in trace concentrations, just 1 ChukchiSea 4.0 2.6 4.3
individualin100liters,canbeconsidered‘rare’.The HighArctic 5.5 4.8 5.7
phenomenonofrarespecieshasreceivedagooddeal
Size-classabundancedistributionfits
ofattention(forexample,Gaston,1994).Rarespecies
EastSea/SeaofJapan 1.8 4.9 2.4
have become a focus in biodiversity conservation NorthPacific 4.4 3.7 4.7
(for example, Lyons et al., 2005). In microbial BeringSea 4.4 1.9 4.7
ecology, the results from high-throughput sequen- ChukchiSea 4.6 3.8 4.9
HighArctic 5.5 4.8 5.7
cing commonly suggest the existence of very large
numbers of apparently rare species, present in low
LowestAICvalues(inbold)indicatethebestmodelfit.Multiplevalues
concentrations (for example, Dunthorn et al., 2014). inboldindicateindistinguishablefits(differenceso1).
Figure4 Observedabundancedistributionsoftintinnidassemblages:speciesabundancedistributions(spp)andsize-classabundance(S-
C) for pooled populations of each of the five systems sampled. ES/SJ indicates East Sea/Sea of Japan. See Table 3 for the results of
modelingtheabundancedistributionshown.
TheISMEJournal

Highlatitudeassemblages
JRDolanetal
2181
hemisphererepresentsdeclinesinthevarietyofforms
in an assemblage and species redundancy. Conse-
quently, there appears to be a latitudinal gradient in
the capability of assemblages to adapt to environ-
mental changes in least with regard to size-spectra of
available prey items or the loss of a particular
dominant species. The latitudinal diversity gradient
in another group of planktonic protists, foraminifera,
appears closely related to temperature over a wide
variety of time scales (Yasuhara et al., 2012), suggest-
ing temperaturehasa preponderant role indetermin-
ing species richness. If changes in species occur with
distributions shifted northward, Arctic assemblages
may become slightly more species-rich and increases
inspeciesrichnesswouldlikelyincreasethenumbers
Figure5 Therelationshipsbetweentheaveragelatitudesampled of redundant species. Theoretically, as redundancy
for each of the five assemblages and the portion of redundant
among species increases ecosystem stability (Naeem,
speciesfound(squares)andthenumbertracespeciesencountered
(circles). Significant (Po0.01) negative linear relationships with 1998),globalclimatechangemayincreasethestability
latitudeareevidentforboththe%ofspeciespoolasredundants of high latitude ecosystems. However, the relatively
(n=5,r=0.984)andthenumberoftracespecies(n=5,r=0.987). small species pools of the northern high latitude
assemblages suggest a low capacity to adapt to
Using our non-exclusive categories, a species changing conditions.
found as a single cell is defined as rare but if it
is in the same LOD size-class as another species, it
is also a redundant. However, the majority of
Conflict of Interest
redundant species were not rare but relatively
abundant, as they were found in far greater than The authors declare no conflict of interest.
trace concentrations. Redundants were most numer-
ous in the size-classes of the dominant species and
Acknowledgements
can likely replace a dominant species, for example,
onesubjectedtoahighrateofspecificmortalityfrom
The comments and suggestions of Dave Montagnes, three
a parasite or predator (that is, Coats and Bachvaroff, reviewers and the editor on previous versions led to
2012). A species can change roles from a minor to significant improvement in the manuscript. Financial
a major role. In temperate and sub-tropical assem- supportwasprovidedbytheCNRS(France).Thisresearch
blages of tintinnids, a species can be dominant in was part of the project titled ‘Korea-Polar Ocean in Rapid
Transition(KOPRI,PM15040)’,fundedbytheMOF,Korea.
one population and a redundant in another (Dolan
etal.,2013).IntheBeringSea,Codonellopsisfrigida
wasthedominantformwhereasinChukchiSeawas
a redundant species. It has been argued that the
existence of redundant species should increase the
References
capability of an assemblage to exploit changes in
conditions (Naeem, 1998). Like rare species, we
Adams J. (2009). The Holy Grail of ecology: latitudinal
found redundant species declined in relative impor-
gradients.In'SpeciesRichness:PatternsintheDiversity
tance with latitude (Figure 5). ofLife'.Springer:Berlin,Germany,pp47–95.
AgathaS,Strüder-KypkeMC.(2012).Reconcilingcladistic
andgeneticanalysesinchoreotrichidciliates(Protists,
Spirotrichea, Oligotrichea). J Eukaryot Microbiol 59:
Conclusion
325–350.
We found the latitudinal decline in species richness Agatha S, Laval-Peuto M, Simon P. (2013). The tintinnid
lorica.In:DolanJR,MontagnesDJS,AgathaS,CoatsDW,
of tintinnid ciliates corresponded to fewer rare
StoeckerDK(eds).TheBiologyandEcologyofTintinnid
species, fewer presumed redundant species and
Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton. Wiley-Blackwell:
fewer size-classes but without a reduction in the
Oxford,UK,pp17–41.
total range of size-classes present. Overall, declines
Bachy C, Gómez F, López-García P, Dolan JR, Moreira D.
were in the numbers of species accompanying the
(2012). Molecular phylogeny of tintinnid ciliates
dominant forms. Interestingly, the dominant forms (Tintinnida, Ciliophora). Protist 163: 873–887.
remained more or less the same set of species. The
BachyC,DolanJR,López-GarcíaP,DeschampsP,Moreira
declines were then in presumed redundant species D. (2013). Accuracy of protist diversity assessments:
andnumbersofrarespecies.Bothcategoriesdeclined morphology compared to cloning and direct pyrose-
with latitude to apparent zero values in the High quencingof18SrRNAgenesandITSregionsusingthe
Arcticassemblage(Table1andFigure5).Thedecline conspicuoustintinnidciliatesasacasestudy.ISMEJ7:
in species richness with latitude in the Northern 244–255.
TheISMEJournal

Highlatitudeassemblages
JRDolanetal
2182
Brown MV, Philip GK, Bunge JA, Smith MC, Bissett A, protists) are structured by mouth size. ISMEJ 7:
LauroFMetal.(2009).Microbialcommunitystructure 1237–1243.
inthe NorthPacific Ocean.ISMEJ 3: 1374–1386. Dolan JR, Yang EJ, Lee SH, Kim SY. (2013). Tintinnid
BurkovskiiIV.(1973).VariabilityofParafavelladenticulata ciliates of the Amundsen Sea (Antarctica) Plankton
inthe WhiteSea.Zoologicheskii Zh 52:1277–1285. Communities. PolRes 32: 19784.
Burnham KP, Anderson DR. (2002). Model selection Dolan JR, Pierce RW, Bachy C. (2014). Cyttarocylis
and multi-model inference: a practical information- ampulla,apolymorphicciliateofthemarineplankton.
theoreticapproach.Springer:New York, NY, USA. Protist 165:66–80.
Caron DA, Countway PD. (2009). Hypotheses on the role DunthornM,StoeckT,ClampJ,WarrenA,MahéF.(2014).
of the protistan rare biosphere in a changing world. Ciliates and the rare biosphere: a review. J Eukaryot
AquatMicrob Ecol57:227–238. Microbiol 61: 404–409.
Claessens M, Wicjkham SA, Post AF, Reuter M. (2010). Edgcomb V, Orsi W, Bunge J, Jeon S, Christen R, Leslin C
A paradox of the ciliates? High ciliate diversity et al. (2011). Protistan microbial observatory in
in a resource-poor environment. Mar Biol 157: the Cariaco Basin, Caribbean. 1. Pyrosequencing vs
483–494. Sanger insights into species richness. ISMEJ 5:
1344–1356.
Coats DW, Bachvaroff TR. (2012). Parasites of tintinnids.
In: Dolan JR, Montagnes DJS, Agatha S, Stoecker DK Gaston KJ, Spicer JI. (2003). Biodiversity: an introduction.
(eds). The Biology and Ecology of Tintinnid Ciliates: 2ndedn. BlackwellPublishing: Oxford,UK.
ModelsforMarinePlankton.Wiley-Blackwell:Oxford, GastonKJ.(1994). Rarity. Chapman& Hall:London,UK.
UK, pp 146–170. HadaY.(1937).ThefaunaofAkkeshiBayIV.Thepelagic
Davis CC. (1978). Variations of the lorica in the genus ciliata. J Fac Sci Hokkaido Imperial Univ, Series 6,
Zool5: 147–216.
Parafavella (Protozoa: Tintinnida) in northern
Norwaywaters. CanJ Zool56:1822–1827. Hubbell SR. (2001). The unified neutral theory of biodi-
versity and biogeography. Princeton University Press:
deVargasC,NorrisR,ZaninettiL,GibbSW,PawlowskiJ.
Princeton,USA.
(1999). Molecular evidence of cryptic speciation in
Kim SY, Choi JK, Dolan JR, Shin HC, Lee S, Yang EJ.
planktonic foraminifers and their relation to oceanic
provinces.Proc NatlAcad SciUSA 96:2864–2868. (2013).MorphologicalandribosomalDNA-basedchar-
acterization of six Antarctic ciliate 5 morphopecies
deVargasC,AudicS,HenryN,DecelleJ,MahéF,LogaresR
from the Amundsen Sea with phylogenetic analyses.
et al. (2015). Eukaryotic plankton diversity in the
J EukaryotMicrobiol 60: 497–513.
sunlitocean.Science348:1261605.
Kofoid CA, Campbell AS. (1929). A Conspectus of the
DohertyM,TamuraM,CostasBA,RitchieME,McManusGB,
Marine and Freshwater Ciliata Belonging to the
KatzLA.(2010).Ciliatediversityanddistributionacross
suborder Tintinnoinea, with Despcriptions of New
an environmental and depth gradient in Long Island
Sound,USA.EnvironMicrobiol12:886–898. SpeciesPrincipallyfromtheAgassizExpeditiontothe
Eastern Tropical Pacific 1904-1905. Univ Calif Publ
Dolan JR. (2010). Morphology and ecology in tintinnid Zool34: 1–403.
ciliates of the marine plankton: correlates of lorica
Kofoid CA, Campbell AS. (1939). The Ciliata: The
dimensions. Acta Protoz 49: 235–244.
Tintinnoinea,84:BulletinoftheMuseumofCompara-
Dolan JR. (2011). The legacy of the last cruise of the tiveZoology:Harvard, USA,pp 1–473.
Carnegie:alessoninthevalueofdustyoldtaxonomic
Laval-Peuto M. (1983). Sexual reproduction in Favella
monographs. J PlankRes 33: 1317–1324.
ehrenbergii (Ciliophora, Tintinnina). Taxonomical
Dolan JR. (2015). Planktonic protists: little bugs pose big implications. Protistologica 29:503–512.
problems for biodiversity assessments. J Plank Res;
Laval-Peuto M, Brownlee DC. (1986). Identification and
doi:10.1093/plankt/fbv079.
systematics of the Tintinnina (Ciliophora): evaluation
DolanJR,PierceRW.(2013).Diversityanddistributionsof
and suggestion for improvement. Ann Inst Océanogr
tintinnids. In: Dolan JR, Montagnes DJS, Agatha S, Paris62: 69–84.
Stoecker DK (eds). The Biology and Ecology of
Lima-Mendez G, Faust K, Henry N, Decelle J, Colin S,
Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton.
Carcillo F et al. (2015). Determinants of community
Wiley-Blackwell: Oxford, pp 214–243. structure in the global plankton interactome. Science
Dolan JR, Stoeck T. (2011). Repeated sampling reveals 348:1262073.
differential variability in measures of species richness Lyons KG, Brigham CA, Traut BH, Schwartz MW. (2005).
and community composition in planktonic protists. Rare species and ecosystem functioning. Conserv Biol
Environ MicrobiolRep 3:661–666. 19: 1019–1024.
Dolan JR, Jacquet S, Torreton J-P. (2006). Comparing McGill BJ, Etienne RS, Gray JS, Alonso D, Anderson MJ,
taxonomic and morphological biodiversity of tintin- BenechaHKetal.(2007).Speciesabundancedistribu-
nids (planktonic ciliates) of New Caledonia. Limnol tions: moving beyond single prediction theories to
Oceanogr 51: 950–958. integration within an ecological framework. Ecol Lett
Dolan JR, Ritchie MR, Ras J. (2007). The neutral commu- 10: 995–1015.
nity structure of planktonic herbivores, tintinnid Montagnes DJS. (2013). Ecophysiology and behavior of
ciliates of the microzooplankton, across the SE tintinnids. In: Dolan JR, Montagnes DJS, Agatha S,
Pacific Ocean.Biogeosciences4:297–310. Stoecker DK (eds). The Biology and Ecology of
Dolan JR, Ritchie ME, Tunin-Ley A, Pizay M-D. (2009). Tintinnid Ciliates: Models for Marine Plankton.
Dynamics of core and occasional species in the Wiley-Blackwell: Oxford, UK, pp 85–121.
marine plankton: tintinnid ciliates of the N.W. Moulllot D, Bellwood DR, Baraloto C, Chave J, Galzin R,
Mediterranean Sea.J Biogeogr 36: 887–895. Harmelin-Vivien M et al. (2013). Rare species support
Dolan JR, Landry MR, Ritchie ME. (2013). The species- vulnerable functions in high diversity ecosystems.
rich assemblages of tintinnids (marine planktonic PLoSBiol 11:e1001569.
TheISMEJournal

Highlatitudeassemblages
JRDolanetal
2183
Naeem S. (1998). Species redundancy and ecosystem Whittaker RH. (1972). Evolution and measurement of
reliability. Conserv Biol12: 39–45. species diversity. Taxon21: 213–251.
Orsi W, Song YC, Hallam S, Edgcomb V. (2012). Effect of Wickham SA, Steinmair U, Kamennaya N. (2011). Ciliate
oxygen minimum zone formation on communities of distributionsandforcingfactorsintheAmundsenand
marineprotist. ISMEJ 6: 1586–1601. BellinghausenSeas(Antarctic).AquatMicrobEcol62:
Rutherford S, D'Hondt S, Prell W. (1999). Environmental 215–230.
controlsonthegeographicdistributionofzooplankton Willig MR, Kaufman DM, Stevens RD. (2003). Latitudinal
diversity. Nature 400:749–752. gradients of biodiversity: patterns, process, scale and
Raybaud V, Tunin-Ley A, Ritchie ME, Dolan JR. (2009). synthesis. AnnuRev EcolSyst 34: 273–309.
Similarpatternsofcommunityorganizationcharacter- Wilson JB. (1991). Methods for fitting dominance/
ize distinct groups of different trophic levels in the diversity curves. J VegSci 2: 35–46.
plankton of the NW Mediterranean Sea. Biogeos- Xu D, Sun P, Shin MK, Kim YO. (2012). Species
ciences6:431–438. boundaries in tintinnid ciliates: A case study -
SantoferraraLF,TianM,AlderVA,McManusGB.(2015). Morphometric variabilty, molecular characterisation,
Discrimination of closelyrelatedspecies in tintinnid and temporal distribution of Helicostomella species
ciliates: New insights on crypticity and polymorph- (Cciliophora, Tintinnina). J Eukaryot Microbiol 59:
ism in the Genus Helicostomella. Protist 16: 351–358.
78–92. YasuharaM,HuntG,DowsettHJ,RobinsonMM,StollDK.
Weisse T. (2014). Ciliates and the rare biospher- commu- (2012).Latitudinalspeciesdiversitygradientofmarine
nity ecology and population dynamics. J Eukaryot zooplankton for the last three million years. Ecol Lett
Microbiol 61:419–433. 15:1174–1179.
SupplementaryInformationaccompaniesthispaperonTheISMEJournalwebsite(http://www.nature.com/ismej)
TheISMEJournal

