THE MARINE SAND-DWELLING CILIATES OF CAPE COD
E. FAURE-FREMIET
College de France, Paris, and Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, Mass.
MARINE SANDS AND PSAMMOPHILOUS CILIATES
It is well known that the marine sands between the tidemarks, or deeper along
the seashore, constitute some quite peculiar and interesting biotopes. With regard
to their fauna, one can distinguish the sand-boring animals of large or small size
and, on the other hand, the very minute ones which live in the intergranular spaces
of the sand and constitute an "interstitial" microfauna.
This interstitial microfauna, or mesopsammon, includes, besides numerous
copepods, nematodes, gastrotrichs, etc., many protozoa and most particularly nu-
merous ciliates. Kahl (1933, 1935) has recorded more than 80 ciliate species,
belonging to about 20 different families, from the sandy bottoms of Kiel and
Helgoland.
I found many of these infusorian species and some new ones in the sand of the
tidal zone of different beaches in Brittany (Faure-Fremiet, 1950). This result ties
up with some other dispersed data and agrees with a general statement of Calkins
(1933) who emphasizes the cosmopolitan distribution of the marine littoral proto-
zoan species. But, from an ecological point of view, it can be noted that the size of
the intergranular spaces acts as a selective factor in the distribution of the inter-
stitial ciliates. 1
The intergranular spaces may be roughly estimated from the dimensions of the
solid grains which bound them ; a comparison of the granulometric curves plotted
for different kinds of sand with the associated interstitial fauna leads one to distin-
guish in the fauna two different types of ciliates.
If the mean size of the sand grains exceeds 0.4 mm., the interstitial ciliate fauna
includes some characteristic sand-living species and some occasionally sand-dwelling
infusorians which are much more numerous. The characteristic sand-living spe-
cies are generally characterized by their small or medium size, their flattened
shape, and their jerky motion, with alternately very fast swimming and sudden
stopping when in contact with solid surfaces. The occasional sand-dwellers, quite
varied in shape and size and usually widespread along the seashore, display a com-
mon but more or less accentuated thigmotactic behavior. All these together con-
stitute, in the medium and coarse sands, what I have called the mesoporal infusorian
fauna (Faure-Fremiet, 1950).
If the mean size of the sand grains falls between 0.1 and 0.3 mm., their inter-
spaces shelter some very peculiar species of ciliates, generally thread-like or ribbon-
like, often as long as one or two millimeters, always strongly thigmotactic. These
1 In a previous paper (Faure-Fremiet, 1950) are discussed some of the physical and chemi-
cal conditions which depend on the enormous development of the solid-liquid interfaces of the
sand ; they probably play an important role in interstitial life of the sand-dwelling ciliates.
59

60 E. FAURE-FREMIET
characteristic sand-dwelling species constitute what I have called the microporal
infusorian fauna.
It must be said, however, that some ciliates of the microporal type can live as
well in the coarse as in the fine sand, and these species may he called euryporal.
Finally, if the mean size of the sand grains is below 0.1 mm., or if a coarser sand
is so muddy that the intergranular spaces are filled with very minute organic par-
ticles, the porosity becomes incompatible with the interstitial life of any species of
ciliates.
Numerous observations made on different beaches and sandy flats of the Cape
Cod region during the months of June and July, 1950, offer new evidence of the
cosmopolitan distribution of many psammophilous ciliate species, and of the gen-
eral significance of the two types of infusorian interstitial fauna.
TECHNIQUE
The superficial layers of wet sand exposed at low tide were collected with a
spoon, to a depth of 2 to 10 millimeters, and put in some convenient bottle or carton,
with just a little sea water. At the laboratory, the samples were transferred to
large fingerbowls, covered with sea \vater and allowed to stand overnight.
In order to observe the ciliates, a small quantity of sand, taken from one sample
with a spatula or a pipette, was put in a Petri dish and gently agitated with sea
water to which a few drops of a 12 per cent MgCl. 2 solution were added. -
Then the sand was gathered at one side of the dish and the water examined
under a low-power binocular microscope. The psammophilous ciliates, now swim-
ming or gliding on the glass bottom of the dish, are easily picked up with a capillary
pipette and transferred to a slide for a more careful examination, or placed in small
covered dishes with normal sea water and sand grains for later examination.
The granulometric analyses of three different types of sand were made at the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. The corresponding curves w r ere plotted
for the very fine sand of the Barnstable Harbor flats, and for the two coarse sands
from Tarpaulin Cove and Nobska beaches (Fig. 1).
A rough micrometric estimation of the mean diameter of the grains was quite
sufficient for the comparative study of many other samples.
MESOPORAL INFUSORIAN FAUNA
The sands of almost all the beaches around Woods Hole shelter ciliate species
of the mesoporal type.
The samples examined were collected in several places on different beaches at
Penzance, Woods Hole (M. B. L. beach), Sippiwisset, Quisset, Gansett and Nona-
messet along the Buzzards Bay coast, and at Tarpaulin Cove, Nobska, Falmouth,
and Great Pond along the Vineyard Sound.
In every case the granulometric measurements show that the size of most of
the sand grains lies roughly between 0.3 mm. and 1.0 mm. These sands are
quartzous, with very few mica flakes, and contain, with few or no mud particles,
a variable amount of organic residues.
2 See Faure-Fremiet (1950). Magnesium chloride, which narcotizes many small metazoans
rapidly, decreases the thigmotactic adherence of the ciliates, and hence releases them from the
sand particles, without a sensible alteration of their motility.

MARINE SAND-DWELLING CILIATES 61
In these somewhat coarse sands, the ciliates are generally neither abundant
nor very varied ; they belong most often to diatom-ingesting species.
90-
70
60-
SO-
40
30-
20-
10-
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^""^"^^^^F^^?^^^^"^^^^^^^^^^^"^^^^^^^^^^^^^^T^T*"fl
0.0 1 mm. 0.05 0.1 02 0.3 0.5 1 234579
FIGURE 1. Granulometric characteristics of sands collected on three different beaches of
Cape Cod. Cumulative curves; abscissa: diameter, in millimeters, of the sand grains (loga-
rithmic scale) ; ordinate : weight per cent of the sand grains larger than the corresponding diam-
eter. A Barnstable Harbor flat; Tarpaulin Cove; X Nobska beach.
The typically mesoporal species observed are the following :
Holotricha Gymnostomata :
Mesodinimn piilc.v, f. pnpula Kahl
Placus (Thoracophyra} buddcnbrocki Sauerbrey
Remanella margaritifera (?) Kahl
Oligotricha :
Strotnbidium sauerbreyae Kahl
Hypotricha :
Discocephalits rotatornis Ehrb.
The other species, widely distributed along the seashore, belong occasionally,
but not specifically, to the mesoporal fauna ; the following are frequently en-
countered :

62 E. FAURE-FREMIET
Holotricha Gymnostomata :
Lacrymaria sp.
Coleps tesselatns
Holotricha Hymenostomata :
Pleuronema sp.
Front onia sp.
Heterotricha :
Condylostoma patens (O.F.M.) Stein
Hypotricha :
Epiclintes ainbiguus O.F.M.
Euplotcs sp.
Diophrys scutum Duj.
Uronychia transjuga O.F.M.
Aspidisca major Madsen
Finally, some sand-living ciliates of euryporal character are often present :
Holotricha Gymnostomata :
Tracheloccrca phaenicopterus
Trachelocerca sp.
Hypotricha :
Holosticha jasciola (?) Kahl
It is apparent that these different vegetarian species seem to be living quite
independently of one another. Their quantitative distribution appears quite vari-
able and unequal, not only from one beach to another but also along the same beach,
between two areas only a few meters distant and showing the same physical appear-
ance. Sometimes a local population of one of these species may be fairly abundant,
probably in connection with the local growth of some species of diatom or bacteria
utilized as food. This local growth is conditioned itself, perhaps, by some slight
local difference in the intensity of light or the tidal agitation.
MICROPORAL INFUSORIAN FAUNA
Some of the special conditions needed by the ciliates of the microporal type are
found in the sand of the Barnstable Harbor flats, on the south coast of Cape Cod
Bay. There the sand is very fine, slightly muddy, closely packed, and inhabited
by many burrowing invertebrates, such as clams and worms.
The ciliates seem to be confined to the superficial layer of clear gray sand, some-
times reddish spotted by purple bacteria, and covering a deeper black sand rich in
organic decomposition products.
The size of the sand grains varies from 0.05 mm. to 0.2 mm. In many samples
collected on the flats exposed at low tide, there was found a more or less abundant
and varied association of the following characteristic microporal species :

MARINE SAND-DWELLING CILIATES 63
Holotricha Gymnostomata :
H elicoprorodon (Chaenea} gigas Kahl
Centrophorella fasciolata Sauerbrey
Centrophorella lanceolata n. sp.
Geleia simplex n. sp.
Geleia decolor Kahl
Geleia jo s sat a Kahl
Geleia orbis Faure-Fremiet
Remanella sp.
Heterotricha :
Condylostoma remanei Spiegel, Kahl
Blepharisma darissimum Anigstein
Blepharisma sp. ?
Hypotricha :
Urostrongylum can datum Kahl
Besides this very specific microporal fauna of ciliates, one observes some of the
euryporal species already mentioned, and the very curious Parable pharisma pelli-
tuiii Kahl ; this is much more abundant in a different biotope, such as the felting of a
dense algal littoral flora in some brackish-water ponds.
It can be noted that on the Barnstable flats, as well as on the Brittany beaches,
the different species of Geleia behave like saprobic ciliates ; they are fairly abundant
where purple bacteria grow. On the other hand, different species of Centro-
phorella, Remanella and Blepharisma are commonly encountered in the same
biotope with Geleia, and they may also be found in clean fine sand and occasionally
in the somewhat coarse sand of the open beaches, with some of the characteristic
species of the mesoporal infusorian fauna.
COMPARATIVE STUDY OF THE CILIATE INTERSTITIAL FAUNA
According to the results above, the mesoporal and the microporal infusorian
fauna show respectively the same characteristics in the littoral sands of Cape Cod
and in those of Brittany. However, the mean size of the sand grains available for
each of the two different interstitial faunas seems to be slightly lower on Cape Cod
than on the Brittany coasts ; this may be due to the presence in Brittany beaches
of numerous mica flakes which assure a more compact packing of the sand grains
than the almost pure quartzous particles of the Cape Cod sands. In other words,
with equal diameter of sand grains, the interspaces are larger between angular
particles than between flat and angular particles mixed together ; it is known that
the dimensions of these spaces act as an important ecological factor in the distribution
of ciliates (Faure-Fremiet, 1950).
As a matter of fact, among the different Cape Cod sandy shores examined, the
typical microporal infusorian fauna was only encountered in sands of the Barn-
stable Harbor flats. Very fine, slightly muddy, filled with numerous sand-boring
animals such as annelids and clams, rich in organic residues and in sulfur bacteria,
this sand resembles closelv in its microfauna the sand of one beach studied in

64 E. FAURE-FREMIET
Brittany, namely, the beach of Mousterlin, near Concarneau (Faure-Fremiet,
1950). However, Barnstable Harbor shows some estuarine characteristics, such
as some tidal variations of the sea water salinitv.
j
Considering the cosmopolitan character of the marine littoral ciliates, the data
gained from study of the Cape Cod sandy shores need some discussion. Many
of the ciliates found there can be identified without hesitation, and belong to spe-
cies already described, and found in the European beaches or sandy grounds. Some
others appear very closely related to known species. Finally, some seem to be
new species.
The following species in the sands of the Cape Cod region were positively identi-
fied with those described in the Brittany coast (Faure-Fremiet. 1950) and the
Bay of Kiel (Kahl, 1933, 1935) :
Holotricha Gymnostomata :
Mesodiniinn pnle.v f. pnpnla Kahl
Placits (Thauracophrya) buddenbrocki Sauerbrey
Helicoprorodon (Chacnca} gigas Kahl (Faure-Fremiet, 1950)
Centrophorella fasciolata Sauerbrey, Kahl
Coleps tesselatus Kahl
Heterotricha :
Condylostoma patens O.F.M.
Condylostoma remand Spiegel
Blepharisma clarissiiinuii Anigstein
Parable pharisma pellitiim Kahl
Hypotricha :
Epidintes ambiguiis O.F.M.
Urostrongyhtm caudatum Kahl
Discocephalus rota tori us Ehrb.
Diophrys scutum Duj.
Uronychia trans juga O.F.M.
Among these ciliates, Discocephalus rotatorius requires special mention ; this
apparently uncommon infusorian, first described by Ehrenberg from the seashore
of the Sinai peninsula, was again observed by Sauerbrey (1928) on the sand
grounds of the Bay of Kiel. The form found in the coarse sand of Tarpaulin
Cove shows not only the same morphological characteristics, but also the same
physiological peculiarity reported by Sauerbrey, namely, the ingestion of small
sand particles.
Some species, such as Condylostoma patens, show great variability of shape
and size, but not of structure ; however, this does not make identification difficult.
On the other hand, it is hard to decide for some other species whether the differ-
ences observed between populations living in different regions are of specific value,
or merely define some geographic varieties, or result from poor descriptions in the
the literature.
Among the Holotricha, Geleia orbis, very abundant in the sand of Barnstable
Harbor, seems to be more flattened and more thigmotactic than the Brittany form

MARINE SAND-DWELLING CILIATES 65
(Faure-Fremiet. 1950), but one does not observe any significant differences be-
tween these, either as to size (up to 1.5 mm. in full extension) or structure.
Geleia decolor Kahl is apparently identical with the Brittany species which T
described under this name, but both are slightly smaller than the Kahl species
and differ perhaps from his by the presence of a little anterior and preoral pit.
Among the Heterotricha a species of Blepharisma with a beaded macro-
nucleus, very common in Barnstable Harbor, should be considered as B. claris-
siinnin forma arcnicola Kahl; it is smaller than the latter form, however, being
275 to 300 micra as opposed to 450 micra (according to Kahl). It seems to be
similar to a form observed by Dragesco (personal communication) in the sand at
Roscoff. On the other hand, B. clarissimum Anigstein is so well characterized
by its cytoplasm (refringent. transparent and hyaline, like that of an Opalina)
that the so-called "forma arenicola" must be considered as a distinct species.
Among the Hypotricha, a microporal Holosticha with numerous macronuclear
beads is shaped nearly like H. e.vtcnsa Kahl, with two frontal cirri ; it is a little
larger than Kahl's species (about 300 micra contra 140 to 240 micra) and pos-
sesses four or five transverse cirri like H. jasciola Kahl, as against 6 to 7 as in
H. e.rtcnsa. But the latter species is narrower and possesses three frontal cirri at
least.
A mesoporal Aspidisca, measuring about 50 to 55 micra, resembles very closely
A. major Madsen, in its two elongated macronuclear pieces and its five transverse
cirri (as opposed to 6 for A. binucleata Kahl, and 11 to 12 for A. polystyla Stein).
However, the Madsen species is larger : 60 to 90 micra.
Three presumably new species need now a more .detailed description.
NEW SPECIES
Centrophorella lanceolata n. sp. (Fig. 2)
The enigmatic genus Centrophorella (see Kahl, 1933, 1935 and Faure-Fremiet,
1950), first described by Sauerbrey under the name Kentrophoros, probably be-
longs to the family Amphileptidae, according to Kahl.
The different species are strongly thigmotactic, very fragile and difficult to ex-
amine in vitro. The use of MgCL solution shows that they are much more fre-
quently represented in the microporal interstitial fauna than it was supposed at
first. I did not observe in the fine sand of Barnstable Harbor the very large spe-
cies C. fistulosa Faure-Fremiet of the Brittany coast, but I found, besides C.
jasciolata Sauerbrey, a new one which I call C. lanceolata n. sp. It seems highly
probable that it can be found elsewhere, and a form recently observed at Roscoff, in
Brittany, by Dragesco (personal communication) is perhaps the same.
Centrophorella lanceolata is a very flattened and ribbon-like ciliate, measuring
about 460 to 520 micra in length, 40 micra wide and 5 to 6 micra thick. It tapers
at the ends ; the anterior part is slender, with a sort of neck preceding the buccal
edge, curved on the right side and bearing a row of long cilia. The posterior end
is pointed.
The ventral surface is ciliated, and the dorsal one is covered with an accumula-
tion of dark sulfur bacteria, except at a narrow lateral margin at the neck and at
the tail.

66 E. FAURE-FREMIET
0-
m
100 -
m
FIGURE 2. Centrophorclla lanceolata n. sp. A: View of the living infusorian. showing
the dorsal brush of sulfur bacteria. B : Outline of the ciliate showing, after staining, the size
and the position of five macronuclei and one (probably) micronucleus.

MARINE SAND-DWELLING CILIATES 67
The associated sulfur bacteria, rod-shaped and all of the same length, measure
about 10 micra ; they are attached to the dorsal surface of the ciliate infusorian body
by one end, and arranged in a parallel manner like the bristles of a brush. That is
a characteristic of the so-called Caulobacteria the genus Pasteuria (Metschnikoff),
for example. As is the case among others of this group, they divide longitudinally.
The dark appearance of the bacteria of C. lanceolata is due to the presence in
their cytoplasm of highly refractile sulfur granules ; in fact, these bacteria are really
colorless, as are those of C. fistitlosa, whereas those of C. jascioJata show a pink
color.
It is known that the nuclei of the Centrophorella (Kahl, 1933, 1935; Faure-
Fremiet, 1950) are very small; C. lanceolata shows five to six globular macronuclei
about 4 micra in diameter, and some smaller micronuclei.
FIGURE 3. Remanclla obtusa n. sp. View of the ciliated right side. M, mouth; N, double
macronucleus with one micronucletis ; V, Miiller's vesicles with refringent bodies.
The association of the Centrophorella with the Caulobacteria is a perfectly
constant character ; in each case these bacteria are sulfur bacteria, but they differ in
size and color with each species of Centrophorella. It would be interesting to de-
fine the nature, specific or adaptively induced, of these differences. On the other
hand, it is noteworthy that the bacteria constantly associated with a heterotrichous
ciliate, Parablepharisina pelUtum Kahl, are quite different and do not contain
sulfur.

68 E. FAURE-FREMIET
Remanella obtnsa n. sp. (Fig. 3)
Whereas the different known species of Remanella belong to the microporal
interstitial fauna, this new one was found many times in the relatively coarse sand
of Nobska beach.
At first sight, R. obtnsa recalls some species of Chlamydodon by its shape and
its thigmotactic behavior. This ciliate is very flat, yellowish in color, with a brown
pigmented area around the mouth. It measures about 1 10 micra in length and is
40 micra wide. Its anterior edge is broadly rounded.
M
lit
III
- :a 1
N
:!.J 50-
o :;:-
*!;i-~^J
prU!!i
FIGURE 4. Gelcia simplex n. sp. M, mouth ; N, double macronucleus with one micronucleus ;
V, large posterior contractile vesicle.
The mouth appears as a lateral semi-circular notch without pharyngeal pro-
longation. The Miiller's vesicles, with a large refringent granule in each one, are
6 to 8 in number. The animal possesses two macronuclei, each containing a central
chromatic body, and a single micronucleus.
Remanella obtnsa is ciliated only on its flat right side; it is very thigmotactic,
and glides rapidly on the surface of the sand grains. It is a diatom feeder.

MARINE SAND-DWELLING CILIATES 69
Geleia simplex n. sp. (Fig. 4)
Geleia simplex, frequently encountered in the fine sand of the Barnstable Har-
bor flats, differs from the other species of the genus (see Kahl, 1933, 1935; Faure-
Fremiet, 1950) by the lack of an anterior prebuccal lobe, the nearly apical location
of the mouth, and the presence of a large posterior vacuole. Its length is about
260 to 300 micra, and its width about 30 micra. Its flexible and slightly con-
tractile body is more or less flattened.
G. simplex possesses two macronuclei with large karyosomes, and one
micronucleus.
The mouth is an oval depression extending anteriorly between two body rows
of cilia. The buccal ciliation includes a fringe of large cilia on the right side and
on the left one a field of fine undulating cilia.
This work was done at the Marine Biological Laboratory under a grant of
the Commonwealth Fund, and with the aid of the American Philosophical Society.
It gives me great pleasure to acknowledge here the assistance of Mr. Turner, at
the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, in the exploration of the Barnstable
Harbor flats and the measurements of some sand samples. I am grateful to Dr.
M. Harnly and Dr. G. Kidder, who read the manuscript.
SUMMARY
1. Two categories of ciliate species dwell in the damp sand of marine beaches;
some of these seem to be so closely adapted to interstitial conditions that they do
not live outside ; some others enter the sand readily and can live in it as well as
anywhere else along the seashore, where they are ordinarily widespread.
2. With regard to the size of the interstitial sand spaces, which are roughly pro-
portional to the size of the grains, the sand-dwelling ciliates can be divided into
two ecological classes :
In coarse sands, with a mean diameter of the grains above 0.4 mm., the mesoporal
infusorian fauna includes a few species exclusively sand-living and many occasional
sand-dwelling forms.
In fine sands, with a mean grain diameter of 0.3 to 0.7 mm., the microporal in-
fusorian fauna is composed of true sand-living ciliate species.
In addition, some typical interstitial species, widespread in fine and coarse sands,
are called euryporal.
3. Comparison of the ciliate interstitial fauna observed in Brittany and Cape
Cod beaches shows that interstitial species are cosmopolitan, and that the distin-
guishing characteristics of mesoporal and microporal fauna have a generalized
ecological significance. On the other hand, it appears that the truly microporal
species are endowed with some peculiarities very interesting from the standpoint
of cytology, cell-physiology and micro-ecology.
LITERATURE CITED
CALKINS, G. X., 1933. The biology of the protozoa. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia. (2nd
Edition ).

70 E. FAURE-FREMIET
FAURE-FREMIET, E., 1950. Ecologie des Cilies psammophiles littoreaux. Bull. Biol. dc la
France et de la Belgique, 84 : 35-75.
KAHL, A., 1933. Ciliata libera et ectocommensalia. In: Grimpe und Wagler, Thierwelt der
Nord- und Ostsee. Akad. Verl., Leipzig.
KAHL, A., 1935. Wimptiere oder Ciliata. In: Fr. Dahl, Die Tierwelt Deutschlands. Fischer,
Jena.
SAUERBREY, E., 1928. Beobachtungen iiber einige neue oder wenig bekannte marine Ciliaten.
Arch. f. Protistcnk., 62 : 355-407.
SPIEGEL, A., 1926. Einige neue marine Ciliaten. Arch. f. Protistcnk., 55 : 184-190.

Fauré-Frémiet, E. 1951. "THE MARINE SAND-DWELLING CILIATES OF CAPE
COD." The Biological bulletin 100, 59–70. https://doi.org/10.2307/1538541.
View This Item Online: https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/item/17323
DOI: https://doi.org/10.2307/1538541
Permalink: https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org/partpdf/37851
Holding Institution
MBLWHOI Library
Sponsored by
MBLWHOI Library
Copyright & Reuse
Copyright Status: In copyright. Digitized with the permission of the rights holder.
Rights Holder: University of Chicago
License: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/
Rights: https://biodiversitylibrary.org/permissions
This document was created from content at the Biodiversity Heritage Library, the world's
largest open access digital library for biodiversity literature and archives. Visit BHL at
https://www.biodiversitylibrary.org.
This file was generated 25 August 2023 at 14:25 UTC

