FINLAY & FENCHEL - ECOLOGY OF LOXODES 73
REVIEW ARTICLES
PHYSIOLOGICAL ECOLOGY OF THE CILIATED PROTOZOON
LOXODES
B. J. FlNLAY & T. FENCHEL*
* Department of Ecology and Genetics, University of Aarhus,
DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.
Introduction
Protozoa tend to thrive in the same places as other microorganisms.
Whether in sewage plants, the stomachs of ruminants, Sphagnum bogs
or the faecal pellets of zooplankton, large numbers of bacteria and
other microorganisms invariably provide favourable conditions for the
grazing activities and growth of Protozoa. Microorganisms also flourish
in the soft sediments of productive lakes and Protozoa too find a variety
of niches there. Some live in and graze on the superficial algal mat,
some occupy the interstices and some seek out the region of low oxygen
tension and reducing conditions that invariably exists a few millimetres
below the sediment surface. Many Protozoa, especially the smallest
forms, are quite difficult to identify and this has often been a hindrance
in ecological investigations, but the larger Protozoa, in particular those
with prominent features like the ciliate Loxodes (Fig. 1), are easily
identified. Loxodes was first recorded in the late 18th century when it
was assigned to the genus 'Kolpoda' by Muller. Its current name was
provided by Ehrenberg who erected a special genus for his 'Lippenthier-
chen' (small-lipped animals). The two common species are the relatively
large L magnus (0.3-0.6 mm) and the much smaller L. striatus (0.1-
0.25 mm) (Figs. 2 and 3) but there are probably several others. They feed
principally on algae, but they will also ingest rotifers, testate amoebae,
colonial photosynthetic bacteria and most other particles larger than
about 5 um with some organic content (Figs. 4 and 5).

74 FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT FINLAY & FENCHEL - ECOLOGY OF LOXODES 75
role in such processes as the release and cycling of nutrients and
the flow of energy through ecosystems. In some lakes Loxodes may
dominate not only the protozoan community (Finlay 1982) but the whole
community of microfauna (Finlay 1985). It is also a large Protozoon so
its population biomass can be considerable, and when we consider that
Loxodes may double its number every few days (Bark & Watts 1984;
Finlay & Berninger 1984), its potential importance in the economy of
lakes becomes clearer. This point can be illustrated with a specific
example. On 7 July 1982 Priest Pot contained 2X1012 Loxodes. Each cell
has a wet weight of about 0.2 ug so the total weight would be about
400 kg. This is about four times the biomass of fish in the pond.
The other reason is that its biology is particularly interesting and at
times unique. It is the only freshwater member of the family Loxodidae
but in common with its marine relatives and unlike other freshwater
Protozoa it has no contractile vacuole nor any other obvious method of
osmoregulation. Its Golgi apparatus is unusually well developed for a
ciliate but its nuclear apparatus is primitive and the macronuclei never
divide. Its cell surface is covered with membrane-bound granules con-
taining a yellow-brown pigment and much of the cell interior is compo-
sed of vacuoles of various types and sizes. Some vacuoles contain small
mineral inclusions and are located in specific positions along the dorsal
rim of the cell. These were discovered by Johannes Muller in 1865 and
they subsequently became known as 'Muller bodies'. They have been
claimed to perform various functions but we now believe they enable
Loxodes to perform the only known taxis in a ciliated Protozoon (Fen-
chel & Finlay 1984; 1986a).
Our investigation of Loxodes began with observations of where it
lived and how it was distributed in lakes. We estimated its abundance
and we resolved the factors that most probably controlled its spatial
distribution. We then extended our investigation into some relevant
aspects of its biology, especially its physiology. We have consistently
tried to relate our understanding of the physiology of the organism to
our observations and understanding of its ecology. The review that
follows is an account of our progress so far.
Spatial distribution
Loxodes was discovered to be an important member of the ciliate
There are two principal reasons for our pre-occupation with Loxodes: community living in the sediment of a small lake in Scotland (Airthrey
the first is based on its extreme abundance in some lakes. Protozoa are Loch, Stirlingshire; Finlay, Bannister & Stewart 1979). The lake was
biologically productive and quite shallow (mean depth ~1.5 m) and
voracious consumers of microorganisms and they probably have an
frequent wind-induced mixing of the water column ensured a per-
important, even controlling influence on the size and activity of micro-
manent supply of oxygen at the sediment surface. This meant that the
bial populations. As a consequence they must also play an important

76 FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT FINLAY & FENCHEL - ECOLOGY OF LOXODES 77
FIG. 2. Loxodes magnus Stokes. Scale bar 100 um.
FIG. 3. Loxodes striatus Penard. Scale bar 100 um.
FIG. 4. Typical contortion of L. magnus in sediment. Scale bar 100 um.
FIG. 5. A section of L. magnus showing ingested diatoms and dinoflagellates. Scale bar
100 um. Figs. 2-5 by H. Canter-Lund.
benthic organisms that might otherwise be forced out of the sediment
by anaerobic conditions could remain in the sediment during the sum-
mer months. There they could feed on sedimenting algae and, at
shallower sites, on the algal mat flora developing at the sediment
surface. Benthic oxygen consumption was also stimulated during the
summer and this was recorded as a gradual displacement towards the
sediment surface of the *oxic-anoxic boundary and the redox potential
discontinuity. Many ciliates, including Laxodes, followed this upwards
migration until they met oxygen close to the sediment surface. Numbers
of Loxodes were recorded for two years and a quite simple cyclical
pattern emerged; their number increased to a maximum (2500 per
ml of sediment) during the summer and decreased to a minimum
(<100 ml"1) during the winter (Finlay, 1978, 1980).
Airthrey Loch is not typical of productive lakes, especially the deeper
ones where summer stratification becomes established for long periods
and the hypolimnion becomes progressively deoxygenated. How would
Loxodes fare if it became isolated from a supply of oxygen? Would the
population die, would the cells encyst and await better conditions, or
would they migrate?
The answer was found during a study of Esthwaite Water in the English
Lake District. Goulder (1974) had shown that numbers of Loxodes in the
sediments of Esthwaite decreased almost to zero during the summer
months. He had also recorded planktonic Loxodes in Priest Pot, a small
pond lying adjacent to Esthwaite (Goulder 1972) so it seemed likely
that the planktonic population might simply be the displaced benthic
population, forced into the water column by the arrival of anoxia at the
sediment-water interface. This was later confirmed (Finlay 1981, 1982);
Loxodes escaped into the water column when the water overlying the
sediment became anoxic. The profile of population abundance was
especially interesting: it showed a peak in the metalimnion which
appeared to move in phase with the drift of the oxycline, eventually
returning to the sediment in the autumn when the collapse of stratifi-
cation made oxygen available again at the sediment surface (Fig. 6).
Loxodes living close to the oxic-anoxic boundary presumably had access
to sufficient oxygen so their migrations were considered to be the
necessary behaviour of an obligate aerobe that required oxygen for
* The term 'oxic' is used throughout, to mean water in which oxygen can be detected, i.e.
>1 umol l-1.

FINLAY & FENCHEL - ECOLOGY OF LOXODES 79
78 FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT
odes in the field and we transferred our attention to the neighbouring
Priest Pot. This small (1 hectare) pond was once part of Esthwaite but it
is now physically separated save for a narrow connecting ditch. It
receives substantial levels of plant nutrients from the surrounding
agricultural land and it supports dense crops of small algae and photo-
synthetic bacteria (Finlay & Berninger 1984; Davison & Finlay 1986). The
high algal productivity supports a complex microbial community which
includes at least 20 ciliate species, some of which are extremely abun-
dant. During the summer, Loxodes is present in the water column at
numbers up to about 0.8X106 per litre which is 100 times their maximum
abundance in Esthwaite.
Working on Priest Pot had several advantages. The pond is sheltered,
thermal stratification of the water column is quite stable and sampling
at precise depths was relatively easy. More importantly, large numbers
of Loxodes could be obtained in small samples of water. Water was
collected from discrete depths using a pump sampler fitted with a
sediment detector. Oxygen was recorded polarographically in the field
and immediately after returning water samples to the laboratory (Finlay
1985; Davison & Finlay 1986).
The vertical distribution of Loxodes in Priest Pot was quite similar to
that in Esthwaite; peak abundance was close to the oxic-anoxic bound-
ary, they avoided the epilimnion and numbers decreased exponentially
with depth in the anoxic hypolimnion. Examining the position of the
Loxodes peak more closely we could see that it was always positioned
in water containing little or no detectable (1 umol I-1) oxygen. More
surprising still was the observation that peak abundance also occurred
in water with an elevated nitrite (NO -2) concentration. Localized accumu-
lations of nitrite are not uncommon in either lakes or the open ocean.
In the latter, where they are well-documented, they are invariably
associated with mid-water oxygen minima and they are ascribed to the
activities of bacteria. In the absence of oxygen, these bacteria use nitrate
(NO-3) as a substrate, reducing it to NO-2 by respiration, a respiratory
process similar to that by which they would reduce oxygen (0 ) to water
2
(H 0). The nitrite so produced then accumulates in anoxic water, often
2
as a distinct peak. If Loxodes was aerobic, why did the peak abundance
occur in anaerobic water which also supported a nitrite peak? If as we
respiration. It became obvious however that this simple explanation suspected, the nitrite was produced by dissimilatory reduction of nitrate,
how did Loxodes manage to respire 0 in water where the accompanying
was incomplete. If Loxodes migrated into the water column to find 2
bacteria were forced to respire nitrate? These questions seemed intract-
oxygen, why did it avoid the epilimnion, where there was plenty of
able until we considered the possibility that Loxodes itself might be
oxygen, and why were these 'aerobic' cells also distributed throughout
capable of reducing nitrate.
the anaerobic, sulphide-rich hypolimnion?
Loxodes would require a key enzyme, nitrate reductase, so the activity
of this enzyme was determined at different depths while simultaneously
Nitrate respiration
We required more precise information about the behaviour of Lox-

80 FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT
FINLAY & FENCHEL - ECOLOGY OF LOXODES 81
recording the abundance of Loxodes. Water was passed through a 30 um
water would account for less than 1% of the measured activity (Finlay
sieve which retained almost all Loxodes but allowed most unattached
Span & Harman 1983; Finlay 1985) and microscopic examination of the
bacteria to pass. The sieve retentate was then assayed for nitrate reduc-
surface of Loxodes revealed that it was largely free of attached bacteria
tase. A clear correlation existed between Loxodes abundance and the
Transmission electron micrographs were also scanned for signs of proka-
ryote endosymbionts but none were found. Neither was there any
evidence that ingested material was responsible for the activity
If the enzyme was indeed located in Loxodes then we should detect
it in isolated cells and the activity should be proportional to the amount
of material in the assay. Both species of Loxodes were isolated from
Priest Pot and cultured in the laboratory: each was then assayed for the
enzyme. The results provided strong evidence for the presence of nitrate
reductase in Loxodes. There was a linear relationship between nitrate
reduction and the number of Loxodes cells in the assay and the relation-
ship could be extrapolated to the origin (Finlay, Span & Harman 1983)
The activity per cell was also roughly proportional to cell size in the
two species.
Where might this enzyme activity be located in Loxodes? The dissimila-
tory nitrate reductase in bacteria is membrane-bound so the most pro-
bable site in Loxodes would be the membrane surfaces responsible for
energy production - the inner mitochondrial membrane. We have no
conclusive evidence that the enzyme is located there, merely circum-
stantial evidence based on quantitative analysis of Loxodes mitochon-
dria. When L magnus had access to low levels of oxygen, each cell had
on average 46,000 mitochondria with typical tubular cristae. However
when cells were collected from anaerobic water they were found to
contain on average 78,000 mitochondria. The latter were apparently
normal, with typical infolding of the inner membrane, so the increase
in the number of mitochondria in anaerobic cells was accompanied by
an increase in the surface area of the inner, energy-yielding membrane
This makes some sense, for nitrate respiration employs a shorter elec-
tron transport chain and it is less efficient than aerobic respiration in
the amount of energy it provides. The evidence available for bacteria
indicates that a reduction in molar growth yield of about 50% is associ-
ated with the switch from oxygen respiration to nitrate respiration
so the increased energy-yielding surface area could be viewed as a
compensation for the reduced energy yield accompanying the switch
Supporting evidence for this was obtained by directly measuring the
enzyme activity (Fig. 7): furthermore they both coincided with the nitrite
activity of the electron transport system (ETS). This can be done by
peak in water containing little or no oxygen (Finlay, Span & Harman
exposing the ETS to a formazan dye whose subsequent rate of reduction
1983).
depends on the rate of flow of reducing equivalents down the ETS
The most likely explanation for these enzyme activities is that they
(Finlay, Span & Ochsenbein-Gattlen 1982). A doubling of the specific-
were located in contaminating bacteria but there is no evidence to
ETS activity accompanied the transition from oxic to anoxic water This
support this. The number of nitrate-reducing bacteria counted in the
is quite consistent with our contention that the same transition is associ-

82 FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT
FINLAY & FENCHEL - ECOLOGY OF LOXODES 83
ated with a switch from oxygen to nitrate respiration and that the
down, Loxodes was apparently 'fooled' into swimming in the wrong
principal energy yielding processes remain within the mitochondria.
direction. Cells swimming 'up' before inversion of the tube maintained
Our theory required the demonstration that Loxodes had access to the same orientation with respect to gravity after inversion with the
nitrate and that the nitrite peak could be ascribed to dissimilatory nitrate result that they swam towards the closed end of the test tube which
reduction. The sources and sinks of metalimnetic nitrate have recently now lay above them, and so into water that was devoid of oxygen.
been described and some conclusions have been drawn (Finlay 1985). Conversely, cells that were located in a high 0 tension before inversion
2
The nitrite peak coinciding with Loxodes was usually confined to anoxic and which were poised for 'downwards' swimming, did indeed swim
water and as such it probably had its origin in dissimilatory reduction downwards after inversion, to collect on the dialysis membrane and
of nitrate. It was derived from nitrate which had two principal sources- end up in water with an even higher 0 tension. However in its natural
2
runoff from the surrounding agricultural land and diffusion across the habitat, movement by Loxodes against the pull of gravity will always be
oxycline after production by aerobic, nitrifying bacteria. The nitrifiers associated with a gradual or eventual increase in the ambient 0 tension.
2
depended on entrainment and upwards diffusion of nitrite and ammonia Since it is apparently of some value to Loxodes to seek out a specific 0
2
from the underlying anoxic hypolimnion. tension, it uses its ability to perceive the permanent and unambiguous
cue of gravity to swim vertically and so quickly reach its preferred
environment.
Geotaxis
A prime requirement for gravity perception is the possession of a
The profile of Loxodes abundance in the water column was remarkably mechanoreceptor. In many other animals the various structures which
consistent: cells avoided water containing more than a few per cent fulfil this purpose are known as statocysts and they tend to share certain
dissolved oxygen, a sharp peak in abundance lay close to the oxic- similarities. Each one consists of a mineral concretion with a relatively
anoxic boundary and numbers decreased exponentially through the high specific gravity which is capable of limited movement in a vacuole
anoxic hypolimnion. Loxodes was apparently capable of perceiving the or chamber containing sensory cells: these cells are stimulated by
0 2 tension and of modifying its swimming behaviour accordingly, but gravity-induced displacement of the mineral body. Any such structure
how did it do this and how did it maintain its distinctive vertical profile? in a Protozoon must of course be quite simple and enclosed within the
We could verify that the vertical profile was a product of Loxodes' single cell of the organism. Penard (1917) was the first to suggest that
own behaviour by reproducing it as a scaled down version in test tube the so-called Muller vesicles, a series of mineral bodies enclosed in
cultures that were free of other Protozoa and other potential competitors vacuoles and located along the dorsal rim of Loxodes, might function
or predators. Using the same cultures we also observed patterns of as statocysts. Since we now knew that Loxodes could perceive gravity
behaviour that began to explain the vertical profile, for cells behaved and that it must therefore have a mechanoreceptor, we pursued Penard's
in specific ways which depended on the level of 0 2 in the tubes. In the suggestion and examined the structure of the Muller vesicles.
absence of oxygen they tended to swim vertically upwards and in the
By simply considering the physical properties of these organelles it
presence of high levels of 0 they swam vertically downwards. When
2 was clear that they could function as statocysts. They were large enough
cells entered a zone of low 0 tension (e.g. less than about 5% of the
2 and, with barium sulphate as the principal component of the mineral
saturation value, equivalent to about 0.05 mg I-1), vertical swimming
body, they were sufficiently dense to quickly respond to the influence
virtually disappeared and kinetic responses took over (i.e. swimming
of gravity. Furthermore, gravity alone would pull the mineral body to
velocity decreased and the frequency of random re-orientation in-
one side of the vacuole in about one fifth of a second, thus nullifying
creased; Fenchel & Finlay 1984). As a consequence, cells tended to
the background 'noise' produced by Brownian motion.
aggregate at a low 0 tension. Kinetic responses to environmental
2 The mineral body is roughly spherical and about 3 um in diameter. It
stimuli are known for many microorganisms including Protozoa but
is located in a larger (7 um) vacuole and apparently connected to the
orientation and swimming with respect to the force of gravity is unusual,
wall of the latter by a stalk. This much can easily be seen with the light
if not unique in Protozoa. This was obviously a fundamental characteris-
microscope (Figs. 9, 10) but it was clear that a fuller understanding of
tic of the behaviour of Loxodes so we decided to investigate it further.
the functional morphology of the organelle would depend on an analy-
Unequivocal evidence for gravity perception could be obtained quite
sis using the electron microscope.
easily: when test tube cultures like those in Fig. 8 were completely
Serial sections were obtained of both fully-developed and immature
filled, then sealed with a gas-permeable membrane and turned upside
Muller vesicles. The images on individual micrographs were then

84 FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT FINLAY & FENCHEL - ECOLOGY OF LOXODES 85
transferred to perspex plates piled on top of each other to produce a 3-
dimensional scale model of the vesicle and its associated structures.
This model revealed an intimate association between the Muller vesicle
and the cilia of the kinety (row of cilia) on the left side of the cell (Fig.
'up' and what is 'down' and it is most likely to do this if the receptor
11). The 'stalk' supporting the mineral body consisted of a fairly rigid
has only two possible orientations. But the receptor must continue to
sheet of cytoplasm containing nine microtubules. These microtubules
were anchored in a non-ciliated kinetosome (ciliary basal body) lying function when Loxodes glides horizontally across the sediment surface
adjacent to another, ciliated kinetosome. How might this structure or on the underside of surfaces suspended in the water so there are
provide Loxodes with information about the force of gravity? four principal ways in which Loxodes can orient itself with respect to
An efficient gravity receptor will provide information about what is gravity. The relationship between the orientations of both Loxodes and

86 FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT
FINLAY & FENCHEL - ECOLOGY OF LOXODES 87
its Muller bodies was resolved after some patient observation of living
cells (Fig. 11).
Only one side of the cell is fully ciliated (Fig. 1) and if Loxodes
maintains contact with a solid surface it glides over the surface on its
ciliated side. Thus it adopts a specific orientation even when moving
horizontally. Furthermore, we could see that although the cells had
four principal orientations, the Muller body took only one of two
positions. When cells swam vertically downwards or if they glided with
the ciliated side downwards (e.g. over the sediment surface), the Muller
body fell to the anterior right side of the vesicle. Conversely, when the
ciliate swam vertically upwards or if it glided across the underside of a
horizontal surface the body fell to the posterior left side of the vesicle.
The total movement of the Muller body between these two positions
was 3-4 um and, because of the rigidity of the supporting stalk the latter
also moved, changing the angle between the stalk and the ciliary tube
by about 90°.
Most if not all gravity receptors in other animals also involve some
attachment or association with cilia and ciliary basal bodies and there
is now general acceptance that the transduction of the mechanical
sensory input occurs at or close to the basal bodies. In Loxodes too we
can see how this might come about. Movement of the Muller body from
one side of the vesicle to the other will cause some stretching of the
membranes between the two basal bodies. This mechanical stress will
change the ion permeability and hence change the membrane poten-
tial - change that will be propagated across the cell surface to modify
the behaviour and beating frequency of the cilia. Any electrical signal
travelling over the cell membrane will eventually be dampened so large
cells will require more Muller vesicles. Our subsequent analysis of the
occurrence of Muller vesicles in cells of different sizes did indeed show
that the number was proportional to cell surface area (Fenchel & Finlay
1986a).
A remarkable consequence of Loxodes' accumulation of barium is
that it accounts for most of the particulate fraction of this element in
the lake. The first indication of this was the close coincidence in the
vertical profiles of Loxodes abundance and particulate barium in Priest
Pot (Fig. 12) and it was substantiated by our calculation that the contribu- equivalent to about 70% of its maximum swimming velocity but it
tion from Loxodes would be at least 60%. Furthermore, measurements can also orientate itself without exploiting this ability. This is best
of particulate barium in Esthwaite and Priest Pot could be shown to be demonstrated by manipulating cultures in such a way that gravity ceases
proportional to Loxodes abundance over three orders of magnitude to have any value for orientation, by establishing 0 gradients in a
2
(Finlay, Hetherington & Davison, 1983). Loxodes presumably plays a horizontal plane. Figure 13 shows such a system, created in a Sedgewick-
significant but as yet poorly understood role in the biogeochemical
Rafter cell. Oxygen diffuses from the atmosphere and is consumed by
cycle of barium in productive lakes.
bacteria and protozoa in the medium enclosed by the chamber. By
taking long exposure photographs of the behaviour of a population of
Kinetic responses
Loxodes in such a gradient it is possible to record their kinetic responses
Geotaxis allows Loxodes to reach its optimum environment at a rate to oxygen tension (Fig. 14). Cells close to the oxic-anoxic boundary live

88 FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT FINLAY & FENCHEL - ECOLOGY OF LOXODES 89
suspected, have the basis of a biochemical explanation underlying
the behavioural avoidance of oxygen. The intracellular production of
oxygen radicals would presumably be much greater at high partial
pressures of oxygen.
We assayed Loxodes striatus for two enzymes, superoxide dismutase
and catalase; the latter catalyses the removal of hydrogen peroxide
(H 0 ). For comparison and as a control of the methods, we used the
2 2
aerobic ciliate Tetrahymena which was known to contain both enzymes.
The results obtained were of little help in explaining the absence of
Loxodes from oxygenated waters for both enzymes were found to be
present, albeit at much lower levels (25% and 5% for SOD and catalase
respectively) than in Tetrahymena. These activities are low but they
are probably consistent with the microaerophilic habit of Loxodes.
Unfortunately, little more can be inferred. If Loxodes is capable of
synthesising the enzymes it might simply manufacture greater quantities
to deal with the higher substrate levels as the need arose. We apparently
cannot claim the absence of protective enzymes as a reason for Loxodes'
avoidance of oxygenated waters. We also considered the possibility that
oxygen avoidance might not result from a direct interaction with the
dissolved oxygen tension but that some oxygen-related factor (e.g.
sulphide, Fe2+/Fe3+, C0 and pH) had a controlling influence. Two types
in their optimum environment and they respond with a significant 2
of evidence indicated that these other factors were of little importance.
reduction of their random motility; many cells appear almost motionless Firstly, the vertical profiles of C0 , pH, sulphide and ferrous (Fe2+) iron
in a photograph with an exposure of several seconds (Fig. 14). But the 2
in Priest Pot were not closely related to Loxodes abundance. Secondly,
other cells in the population live in a suboptimal environment and their
by manipulating the gas phase surrounding cultures in Sedgewick-Rafter
random motility increases: swimming velocity and pathlength are both
cells we could show that Loxodes followed a retreating source of 0
2
much higher. The resulting population profile is quite similar to that in and was repelled by a high oxygen tension. This behaviour was sustained
the lake and in test tube cultures although it is produced without the when cells simultaneously swam up or down gradients of both C0 and
2
benefit of gravity: it therefore takes much longer to reach equilibrium. pH.
It is very likely that the kinetic responses observed in Fig. 14 are
There was also no evidence that Loxodes was repelled by high levels
the same behavioural responses which trap Loxodes in their optimum
of potentially toxic radicals produced in the surrounding water. It is
environment in the vertical 0 gradient of a lake.
2 known that superoxide and hydrogen peroxide (H 0 ) for example can
2 2
be produced in some natural waters, especially if they are illuminated
Oxygen toxicity and photosensitivity and they contain elevated levels of humic substances. We could detect
Why should the optimum environment for Loxodes be depleted in both superoxide and hydrogen peroxide in the surface water of Priest
oxygen and why do cells avoid water containing 0 levels higher than Pot but there was virtually no correlation between concentration and
2
about 5% of saturation? Our first attempt to answer this question was Loxodes abundance (Finlay, Fenchel & Gardener 1986). Neither was
based on anticipated similarities between Loxodes and other microaer- there any obvious way by which these or any other potentially toxic
ophilic and anaerobic organisms, especially bacteria. Oxygen is toxic to radicals (e.g. OH, 0 ) could be generated in the dark, even allowing
2
many anaerobic bacteria, probably because they lack one or more for probable interactions with transition metal ions.
of the enzymes that confer some protection against oxygen radicals, Thus we returned to our original assumption that the dissolved oxygen
especially the superoxide radical anion (O-2). The enzyme superoxide tension and probably that alone repelled Loxodes from well-oxygenated
dismutase (SOD) catalyses the removal of superoxide so if Loxodes waters. But how did oxygen repel Loxodes? Two quite separate observa-
should fail to synthesise this or other protective enzymes we would, we tions helped to provide the answer. We had noticed that under certain

90 FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT FINLAY & FENCHEL - ECOLOGY OF LOXODES 91
conditions Loxodes appeared to respond to light: cells surrounded by
anoxic water remained insensitive but cells in contact with oxygen were
sensitive to light. By shining a beam of light from a fibre-optic probe onto
cells gathered close to the oxic-anoxic boundary in a spectrophotometer
cell we could see that they responded in three specific ways. The initial
response was transient and involved an increase in tumbling frequency.
Thereafter, tumbling subsided but swimming velocity and pathlength
increased (kinetic response) and thirdly, positive geotaxis was initiated
(Figs. 16, 17). Thus, illumination stimulated cells to quickly move away
from any contact they had with oxygen. They remained in anoxic water
until the light was switched off, whereupon they returned to their
optimum low 0 tension. If cells were exposed to light and oxygen but
2
prevented from swimming into anoxic water they soon began to look
abnormal: numerous vacuoles developed beneath the cell membrane
and the cells exploded. Similar effects eventually developed in cells
kept in the dark if they were continuously exposed to a high 0 tension.
2
Insofar as light apparently exacerbated the deleterious effects of high
oxygen levels the phenomenon was similar to the initiation of positive
geotaxis in cells exposed to trace levels of 0 , for in the latter case also,
2
cells reacted to light as if the oxygen tension had been further increased.
This indicated that light and oxygen interacted in the physiological
effects they produced. The interaction could be important, for Loxodes
living in the wild will occasionally be exposed to various combinations
of light and oxygen. It became apparent that a complete understanding
of the relevance of 0 responses would have to take account of probable
2
interactions with the light level.
We have previously shown (Fenchel & Finlay 1986b) that the *motility
of a population of Loxodes is proportional to swimming velocity so we
can use the easily measured swimming speed as an index of motility.
Motility was minimal when cells were in the dark at an 0 tension of
2
about 5%, it increased in anoxic water and it was highest when the 0
2
tension was greater than 50% (about 5 mg I-1). When cells were also
exposed to a sufficiently high light level, swimming speed increased
at all oxygen tensions except for anoxia, where swimming remained
unaffected. These results, obtained using populations of Loxodes
oriented horizontally in flattened capillary slides, are summarised in minimum in anoxic water. Since cells will tend to aggregate wherever
Fig. 18. We can see that the minimum swimming velocity (proportional their motility is lowest, cells exposed to more than 5 Wm2 will aggre-
to motility) occurs at a progressively lower 0 2 tension as the light level gate in anoxic water.
is increased, and at all irradiances above about 5 Wm~2 it takes a
A similar 'critical' light level was determined using different methods
and populations of cells stratified vertically in spectrophotometer cells,
* The motility of Loxodes and other protozoa can be described as a random walk consisting a system that mimics the distribution of Loxodes in an 0 gradient in
2
of more-or-less straight runs and random changes in direction (tumbling). The motility
the wild. Loxodes accumulated at a low 0 tension in the dark. When
of a population can therefore be quantified by a diffusion coefficient; increasing the 2
the light was switched on, the cells swam down and so out of contact
swimming speed and decreasing the frequency of tumbling, increases the motility (see
Fenchel & Finlay 1986b). with oxygen. The rate of escape was dependent on the intensity of the

92 FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT FINLAY & FENCHEL - ECOLOGY OF LOXODES 93
usually within a few centimetres of the upper limit to the Loxodes
distribution so it is probable that on some occasions light and oxygen
interact to exclude Loxodes from oxygenated water.
Pigments
The pigment mediating the photosensitivity of Loxodes is probably
located in the vast number of granules embedded in the cell membrane
(Fig. 15). These granules are usually referred to as pigment granules and
they are morphologically similar to the pigment-bearing granules in
other, brightly coloured ciliates such as Blepharisma. The principal
pigment in Blepharisma is known to be the potent photodynamic agent
hypericin but we know that the pigment in Loxodes is something quite
different. Absorption spectra of solvent extracts indicate that it absorbs
principally at the blue end of the visible spectrum (Finlay & Fenchel
1986). The action spectrum for escape from oxygenated water also
indicates a blue light receptor. Interestingly the action spectrum shows
at least two peaks, at about 360 and 435 nm; this is consistent with the
pigment being a flavin. Many of the blue light responses in a wide
variety of organisms involve photoreception by flavins but it is usually
unclear how they work. We cannot claim to have a clear impression
of the function of the pigment in Loxodes but we have made some
observations which we think point us in the right direction.
The most significant clue was obtained when Steve Gardener noticed
that the yellow-brown pigment remaining on top of polyacrylamide gels
after electrophoresis of Loxodes homogenates would, in the presence
of light and a tetrazolium dye, turn dark blue. This indicated that the
pigment had produced something which had reduced the dye. We
suspected that the active agent was superoxide and this was confirmed
in a subsequent experiment. The capacity to generate superoxide in the
presence of light is also a characteristic of flavins so the experiment
provided further evidence for the existence of such a compound in the
pigment granules of Loxodes.
The other relevant observations were made while searching for inhibi-
tors of the oxygen response. The most obvious and consistent effect was
step-up in light level and results obtained from a large number of obtained with micromolar concentrations of cyanide which apparently
cultures showed that escape could be detected at irradiances slightly blocked Loxodes' ability to perceive the oxygen tension. Random motil-
less than 10 Wm-2, broadly in agreement with the response of cells in ity also increased and cells generally behaved as they would do in
horizontal capillary tubes. anoxic water (Fenchel & Finlay 1986b). Of particular interest was the
In an effort to relate these findings to the ecology of Loxodes in the observation that the response was independent of the light level: in the
field, we have examined the vertical profiles of Loxodes abundance, 0 presence of cyanide, swimming behaviour remained the same in the
2
and the light regime in Priest Pot. During the summer, light intensities dark, in bright light and at all 0 2 tensions. The demonstration that
in excess of the critical irradiance of 5-10 Wm-2 often penetrate to Loxodes becomes insensitive to light when it also becomes insensitive
depths where the 0 2 tension is about 5 per cent. These depths are to 0 2 is important, for it provides strong evidence that the 'receptors'

94 FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT FINLAY & FENCHEL - ECOLOGY OF LOXODES 95
for light and for oxygen are probably identical. This would also be tension or it may continue swimming down into the anoxic zone. In the
consistent with our earlier observation that behavioural responses to latter case the flow of reducing equivalents down the ETS will cease,
an increase in light level are identical to responses to increased 0 the redox state of the cytochrome oxidase will change and the cell will
2
tension in the dark - in other words the 'active agent' produced in the tumble until it is heading vertically up. The Muller body will then be
presence of light may be identical to that produced in the dark at high oriented posterior left creating a new electrical stimulus which interacts
oxygen tensions. with the cell membrane potential and keeps the cell swimming vertic-
When we come to consider the nature of this 'active agent' and its ally. When the cell reaches its optimum environment the redox state of
probable receptor we must admit we have little firm evidence. Our the cytochrome oxidase is presumably 'ideal' and a new membrane
experiments with the Loxodes pigment would indicate that superoxide potential is established, the oxygen tension is sufficient for respiration,
may well be the agent and the observation that cyanide is effective at the flux of superoxide can be disposed of by SOD, the Muller body fails
micromolar concentrations indicates that a cytochrome oxidase is the to interact significantly with the new membrane potential, and the
receptor but how might these function in the perception of light and probability of geotaxis becomes minimal.
oxygen by Loxodes and how might they interact with gravity perception? Many organisms aggregate at some 0 tension less than atmospheric
2
Let us assume that the common currency for the interaction of light saturation but the function of this behaviour is not usually understood.
and oxygen is a source of reducing power, for example superoxide In Loxodes it probably represents a compromise between avoidance of
which is produced in excess in the dark at a high 0 tension and in high 0 tensions and a periodic requirement for aerobic metabolism
2 2
similar quantities in the light at a low 0 tension. It is known that but the behaviour has another obvious benefit, for it will bring cells
2
superoxide will reduce some components of the electron transport into a zone where competition and predation by other animals are
system, especially cytochrome c and this reducing power will presum- probably unimportant. Most of the zooplankton for example avoid the
ably be transferred to the cytochrome oxidase. Work on various bacteria anoxic zone and the zone of low oxygen tension inhabited by Loxodes.
indicates that the activity of the ETS and the redox state of the cytoch rome
oxidase can influence the cell membrane potential on which we know Conclusions
the frequency and rhythm of ciliary activity in protozoa is based. Thus
Loxodes faces special problems in living close to the oxic-anoxic
the intracellular production of oxygen radicals like superoxide could,
boundary. In tightly-stratified ponds like Priest Pot its optimum environ-
we suspect, modulate swimming behaviour.
ment may be quite narrow and it can be displaced by the slightest
We must of course also incorporate the role of gravity perception in
turbulence. Loxodes cannot sense an 0 gradient directly but its ability
this scheme. It is likely that the movement of the Muller body creates 2
to perceive gravity allows it to make relatively long vertical migrations.
an electrical stimulus close to the basal bodies in the wall of the vesicle.
It is also sensitive to light and oxygen and it uses these environmental
This stimulus will be propagated over the cell membrane and it will
cues to modulate the parameters of its random motility: in the dark, it
doubtless influence the ciliary beat and hence the swimming behaviour.
aggregates at a low 0 tension and in bright light it aggregates in anoxic
2
We can imagine then, two quite separate but interacting processes water. The oxic-anoxic boundary is also a zone where 0 may be a scarce
2
which modify the membrane potential - an input dependent on the and transient resource, but Loxodes can switch to nitrate respiration
redox state of the cytochrome oxidase and another from the orientation and exploit the pool of nitrate that often exists close to the base of the
of the Muller body. oxycline.
When Loxodes enters a sub-optimal 0 tension it displays such transi-
2
ent responses as repeated tumbling and changes in swimming direction.
Acknowledgement
This behaviour will be accompanied by displacements of the Muller
body. When entering a high 0 tension the oxygen 'receptor' will This work received financial support from the Natural Environment
2
undergo an excessive reduction and the cell will tumble until the Muller Research Council,
body is oriented anterior right within the vesicle. This orientation will
create an electrical stimulus which interacts with the membrane poten- REFERENCES
tial: the most important result will be that the cell continues to swim Bark, A. W. & Watts, J. M. (1984). A comparison of the growth characteristics
vertically downwards (positive geotaxis). The cell may successfully de- and spatial distribution of hypolimnetic ciliates in a small lake and an artificial
ploy kinetic responses to trap itself in the zone of optimum low 0 2 lake ecosystem. J. gen. Microbiol. 130, 3113-22.

96 FIFTY-FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT
Davison, W. & Finlay, B.J. (1986). Ferrous iron and phototrophy as alternative
sinks for sulphide in the anoxic hypolimnia of two adjacent lakes, J. Ecol. (in
press).
Fenchel, T. & Finlay, B. J. (1984). Ceotaxis in the ciliated Protozoon Loxodes. J.
exp. Biol. 110, 17-33.
Fenchel, T. & Finlay, B. J. (1986a). The structure and function of Muller vesicles
in loxodid ciliates. J. Protozool., 33, 69-76.
Fenchel, T. & Finlay, B. J. (1986b). Photobehaviour of the ciliated Protozoon
Loxodes: taxic, transient and kinetic responses in the presence and absence
of oxygen. J. Protozool. (in press).
Finlay, B. J. (1978). Community production and respiration by ciliated Protozoa
in the benthos of a small eutrophic loch. Freshwat. Biol. 8, 327-41.
Finlay, B. J. (1980). Temporal and vertical distribution of ciliophoran communities
in the benthos of a small eutrophic loch with particular reference to the redox
profile. Freshwat. Biol. 10, 15-34.
Finlay, B. J. (1981). Oxygen availability and seasonal migrations of ciliated
Protozoa in a freshwater lake. J. gen. Microbiol. 123, 173-8.
Finlay, B. J. (1982). Effects of seasonal anoxia on the community of benthic
ciliated Protozoa in a productive lake. Arch. Protistenk. 125, 215-22.
Finlay, B. J. (1985). Nitrate respiration by Protozoa (Loxodes spp.) in the hypolim-
netic nitrite maximum of a productive freshwater pond. Freshwat. Biol. 15,
333-46.
Finlay, B., Bannister, P. & Stewart, J. (1979). Temporal variation in benthic ciliates
and the application of association analysis. Freshwat. Biol. 9, 45-53.
Finlay, B. J. & Berninger, U.-G. (1984). Coexistence of congeneric ciliates (Karyor-
elictida: Loxodes) in relation to food resources in two freshwater lakes. J.
Anim. Ecol. 53, 929-43.
Finlay, B. J. & Fenchel, T. (1986). Photosensitivity in the ciliated Protozoon
Loxodes: pigment granules, absorbance and action spectra, evidence for a
flavin photoreceptor and ecological significance. J. Protozool. (in press).
Finlay, B. J., Fenchel, T. & Gardener, S. (1986). Oxygen perception and oxygen
toxicity in the freshwater ciliated Protozoon Loxodes. J. Protozool. (in press).
Finlay, B. J., Hetherington, N. B. & Davison, W. (1983). Active biological participa-
tion in lacustrine barium chemistry. Ceochim. Cosmochim. Acta. 47,1325-9.
Finlay, B. J., Span, A. S. W. & Harman, J. M. P. (1983). Nitrate respiration in
primitive eukaryotes. Nature, 303, 333-6.
Finlay, B. J., Span, A. & Ochsenbein-Gattlen, C. (1983). Influence of physiological
state on indices of respiration rate in Protozoa. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 74A,
211-19.
Goulder, R. (1972). The vertical distribution of some ciliated Protozoa in the
plankton of a eutrophic pond during summer stratification. Freshwat. Biol. 2,
162-76.
Goulder, R. (1974). The seasonal and spatial distribution of some benthic ciliated
Protozoa in Esthwaite Water. Freshwat. Biol. 4, 127-47.
Penard, E. (1917). Le genre Loxodes. Revue Suisse Zool. 25, 453-89.

