Europ.J.Protistol.39,365–372 (2003)
© Urban & Fischer Verlag
http://www.urbanfischer.de/journals/ejp
Endemic ciliates (Protozoa, Ciliophora) from tank
bromeliads (Bromeliaceae): a combined morphological,
molecular, and ecological study
Wilhelm Foissner1,*,Michaela Strüder-Kypke2,Georg W.M.van der Staay3,
Seung-Yeo Moon-van der Staay3,and Johannes H.P.Hackstein3
1Universität Salzburg,Institut für Zoologie,Hellbrunnerstrasse 34,A-5020 Salzburg,Austria;
2University of Guelph,Department of Zoology,Ontario N1G 2W1,Canada;
3University of Nijmegen,Department of Evolutionary Microbiology,NL–6525 Ed Nijmegen,The Netherlands
Received:1 September 2003;15 October 2003. Accepted:22 October 2003
Bromeliads are mainly epiphytic rosette plants occurring only in Central and South America.They collect
rain water and particulate materials in tanks (cisterns) formed by the coalescing leaf axils.These tanks
form an extensive,highly compartmentalized water and humus body above the ground and are inhabited
by many ordinary and endemic organisms.We discovered at least 10 new ciliate species in the tanks of
about 15 bromelian species from the Dominican Republic,Ecuador,and Brazil.Since there are 2000–3000
bromelian species with very different lifestyles, they are likely to contain hundreds of novel ciliate
species.Two of the new species described here are real “flagships”,that is,they have such a large size
that they would have been found in Europe,if they were there.Consequently,these species must have a
restricted geographical distribution,disproving the old hypothesis that microscopic organisms are cos-
mopolitan.Also the smaller ciliates described here represent new genera and families, arguing for a
long-lasting,independent evolution driven by ecological constraints and spatial isolation.Almost half of
the new species can switch from bacteriophagous, microstome morphs to a predatory, macrostome
lifestyle,likely due to the strong competition in these peculiar habitats.The high morphological and eco-
logical diversity of tank bromeliad ciliates is only partially recovered by small-subunit (18S) ribosomal
RNA (rRNA) gene sequences.
Key words:Biodiversity;Biogeography;Brazil;Conventional vs.molecular classification;Dominican Re-
public;Ecuador;Endemic ciliates.
Introduction
Lakes, ponds, and rivers are rare in many tropi- substantial reservoir of water and raw humus is
cal and subtropical rain forests because most rain available in undisturbed rain forests of Central and
water is immediately collected by the tree roots. South America, viz., in the tanks (cisterns) of epi-
Likewise, soils contain little humus because the or- phytic and ground bromeliads, which form an ex-
ganic matter is quickly mineralized due to the high tensive, highly compartmentalized ecosystem
air humidity and temperature. In spite of this, a (Martinelli 2000; Schönborn 2003).
Bromeliads are rosette plants of the subclass
*corresponding author Liliidae (lilies), and the most famous species is the
0932-4739/03/39/04-365 $ 15.00/0

366 W.Foissner et al.
pineapple, Ananas sativus (Sitte et al. 1991). The All species shown, except for those living on other
tanks are formed by the coalescing leaf axils, which animals, could be cultivated in natural, centrifuged tank
collect the rain water, and the rosettes of the larger water and/or Eau de Volvic (French table water) en-
riched with some cracked wheat grains to stimulate
species may entrap up to 30 litres. There are
growth of food organisms, viz., bacteria, flagellates, and
2000–3000 bromelia species, many of which exhib-
small ciliates. Predatory species were either fed with
it peculiar lifestyles in a wide variety of environ-
flagellates or small ciliates isolated from the tanks, or
ments; some or even most release specific sub-
with ordinary laboratory cultures of Colpidium kleini
stances into the tank water, whose chemical and and Paramecium aurelia. For details, see Foissner
physical conditions show great local and temporal (2003a, b).
differences, providing innumerable niches for pro- Most morphological and ecological data presented
tists and small metazoans (Picado 1913; Maguire here, are based on cultivated specimens investigated in
vivo and with the methods described in Foissner (1991).
1971; Martinelli 2000; Schönborn 2003).
Soil (humus) samples were investigated with the non-
Since Picado (1913), it is well-known that
flooded Petri dish method, as described in Foissner et al.
bromelian tanks are inhabited by a more or less
(2002). Sequencing of the 18S rRNA genes was per-
specific flora and fauna; about 400 metazoan
formed with standard procedures.
species have been recorded, but many more can be
expected because the tanks are generally poorly
explored (Schönborn 2003). Protists, although ob- Results
viously being common and abundant, were never
studied in detail (Picado 1913; Laessle 1961; Most of the new species found are documented
Maguire 1971; Janetzky and Vareschi 1992; Esteves here by some figures. Only key characteristics are
and da Silva Neto 1996; Little and Hebert 1996; described due to space constraints. For distribu-
Martinelli 2000; Carrias et al. 2001). Only testate tion, see Table 1.
amoebae were investigated to some extent (Van
Oye 1923), and recently a new species, represent-
Morphology,ontogenesis,and gene sequences
ing a new family, was described from Brazilian
tank bromeliads (Torres-Stolzenberg 2000). Here, 1. Lambornella trichoglossa Foissner, 2003
we shall show that also many undescribed ciliate (Figs 1, 2): This tetrahymenid ciliate, measuring
species inhabit this peculiar ecosystem, and that about 200 ×50 µm, described by Foissner (2003b),
their study significantly contributes to understand possibly represents a new genus because it reorga-
protist speciation and diversity. nizes the parental oral apparatus during ontogene-
sis and does not infect mosquito larvae, in contrast
to the congeners. Unfortunately, 18S sequence data
Material and methods are not available. Although L. trichoglossadoes not
form macrostomes, it can feed on large rotifers.
Ciliates were collected from the water and mud accu- Resting cysts are produced.
mulated in the tanks of epiphytic and ground 2. Bromeliophrya brasiliensis Foissner, 2003
bromelians from the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, (Figs 6, 14, 19):This species, described by Foissner
and Brazil. Most samples were taken by W. Foissner
(2003a), is type of the new genus Bromeliophrya
(Brazil, Dominican Republic), some were kindly sup-
and of the new tetrahymenid family Bromelio-
plied by Dr. T. Cordeiro (Cidade University, João Pes-
phryidae, which is characterized by a partially re-
soa, Brazil) and Prof. W. Till (Vienna University; sam-
ples from Ecuador and a single sample from the Do- duced somatic ciliature and migrating kinetofrag-
minican Republic). Since the tank water is acidic (pH ments during ontogenesis. The family consists of
4–6), delaying decomposition and putrefaction of water the genus Bromeliophryaand the two new, not yet
and organic materials, samples can be transported for described genera mentioned below. Morphology,
several days, perhaps even for one or two weeks, with- ontogenesis, and the 18S sequence data show that
out special precautions. However, larger predators,
the Bromeliophryidae are closely related to the
such as insect larvae and crustaceans should be sieved
Glaucomidae (sequence identity with G. scintillans
off because they consume most protists, especially in
98.5%, 98.4% and 98.2%, respectively). The
small samples stored for a longer time. On the other
Metopus-shaped type species has a size of about 55
hand, many of these small metazoans are colonized by
epizoic peritrichs. Accordingly, they should be sampled × 35 µm. It possesses two large, unciliated areas
and transported separately. and does not form macrostomes. Resting cyst pro-

Figs 1–13. Ciliates from bromelian tanks in the SEM (1, 3–5, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13), in vivo (9), and after silver impregna-
tion (2, 6, 11). 1, 2:Lambornella trichoglossa. Arrowheads mark excretory pores. 3–5:New genus 1, ventral and dor-
sal (4, asterisk marks unciliated patch) view of microstomes (3, 4) and ventrolateral view of a macrostome (5). 6:
Bromeliophrya brasiliensishas a large, unciliated area (asterisk) left of the oral apparatus. 7, 8:New, tetrahymenid
genus 3. This gigantic, up to 800 µm long ciliate has a functionless, minute, primary oral apparatus (arrows) and a
large secondary mouth (OA) used to capture large prey, e.g. Paramecium. 9–13:New genus 4 is a minute colpodid
ciliate, which divides in freely motile condition forming a chain (9) with pairs connected by a special structure (10,
13, arrows). LP – left oral polykinetid, MA – macronucleus, OA – oral apparatus, RP – right oral polykinetid. Bars
2 µm (Fig. 13), 10 µm (Figs 8, 10–12), 20 µm (Figs 3–6), 50 µm (Figs 1, 2, 7, 9).

368 W.Foissner et al.
Table 1. Distribution of new and described ciliate species in duction not investigated. A distinctly smaller, new
tanks of about 15 bromelia species from the Dominican Repub- (?) species occurs in the Dominican Republic.
lic (DR; six samples from three sites), Ecuador (E; five samples
3. New genus 1 (Figs 3–5, 14, 17): This ciliate,
from three sites), and Brazil (five samples from two sites).
about 50 µm long, belongs to the Bromeliophryi-
Species 1 Distribution
dae described above. It is rather similar to Glauco-
DR E B ma scintillans, but has an unciliated patch dorsally
and can transform to macrostomes. Resting cysts
New or supposedly new species
could be not produced.
Bromeliophrya brasiliensis + +
Bromeliophryan. sp. (?) + 4. New genus 2 (Figs 14, 18):This ciliate, about
New genus 1 (bromeliophryid) + 60 µm long, also belongs to the Bromeliophryidae
New genus 2 (bromeliophryid) + and is rather similar to B. brasiliensis, but the uncil-
Lambornella trichoglossa + + +
iated areas are less distinct and the right side preo-
Tetrahymena n. sp. (?)2 + +
ral ciliary rows are less conspicuously elongated.
New genus 3 (gigantic tetrahymenid) + +
New genus 4 (colpodid) + Resting cysts could be not produced.
Rhabdostylan. sp. 1(?) (epizoic) + 5. New genus 3 (Figs 7, 8, 14):This gigantic cil-
Rhabdostyla n. sp. 2(?) + iate, up to 800 µm long, is also a tetrahymenine hy-
Epistylisn. sp. (epizoic) + +
menostome, according to both the morphological
Opercularian. sp. (?) (epizoic) +
and the 18S sequence data. It is outstanding by its
Leptopharynxn. sp. (?) +
large size, in being able to feed on Paramecium,
Described species
and in having two entirely different mouths, both
Bresslaua vorax +
completely reorganized during ontogenesis. The
Bryometopus triquetus +
Chilodonella uncinata + original (primary), tetrahymenine oral apparatus is
Cinetochilum margaritaceum + located subapically at the left margin of the cell and
Colpoda cucullus + is likely functionless because it is minute and lacks
Colpoda inflata + + +
a paroral membrane; it possesses, however, 4–8
Colpoda lucida +
(x¯6) adoral membranelles, while all other tetrahy-
Colpoda maupasi +
Colpoda steinii + + menids have only three. The functional (sec-
Cyclidium glaucoma(?)3 + + ondary) mouth is a large funnel produced by the
Cyclidium muscicola + + invaginated anterior body end and lacks any spe-
Cyrtolophosis mucicola + + + cific oral structures. This species also shows some
Dexiotricha granulosa +
sort of microstome-macrostome transformation
Dexiotrichasp.3 +
and produces large resting cysts. Morphologically,
Drepanomonas revoluta +
Frontonia depressa + the ciliate is so different from all the known
Halteria grandinella + tetrahymenids that it could be a representative of
Leptopharynx costatus + + + at least a new family. However, its 18S rRNA se-
Litonotussp.3 +
quence is almost identical (99.3%) to that of
Meseres corlissi +
Tetrahymena corlissi(see Discussion).
Metopus minor +
6. Peritrichs: Several, likely undescribed per-
Microdiaphanosoma arcuatum +
Microthorax pusillus + itrichs were found, most attached to small meta-
Operculariasp.3 + zoans, such as oligochaetes and mosquito larvae.
Oxytricha longigranulosa + Some are rather conspicuous because they form
Pattersoniella vitiphila +
large colonies and have zooids up to 150 µm long.
Plagiocampa rouxi +
Although difficult to quantify, contractility ap-
Platyophrya vorax +
Pseudocyrtolophosis alpestris + + + pears more pronounced than in many related
Sathrophilus muscorum + species from ordinary limnetic habitats. All feed
Stammeridium kahli + on bacteria. No macrostomes were observed. Most
Sterkiella histriomuscorum-complex +
likely they produce resting cysts.
Tetrahymena rostrata + +
7. New genus 4 (Figs 9–13, 15): This ciliate,
Uroleptus lepisma + +
only 20–50 µm long, briefly described by Foissner
Vorticella aqua-dulcis-complex +
and Cordeiro (2000), represents not only a new
1For authorship and date of species, see Result section,
genus, but likely also a new family. Morphological-
Foissner (1998), and Foissner et al. (2002).
ly, it belongs to the order Colpodida, while gene se-
2Reorganizes the parental oral apparatus during ontogenesis.
3Some of these might be undescribed (new) species. quences place it somewhere between the Colpodi-

Endemic ciliates from tank bromeliads 369
da and Grossglockneriida. This species is outstand- Ecology
ing by dividing in freely motile condition (most
other colpodids of this type reproduce in division Ecological data are still very incomplete because
cysts), whereby chains of four individuals are pro- only a few bromelian species and sites were inves-
duced with the individual pairs connected by a spe- tigated. None the less, some interesting observa-
cial structure highly reminiscent of an ordinary tions were made, which will be briefly described.
patent fastener. Further, it forms bacteriophagous (1) Two main ciliate habitats can be distin-
microstomes and flagellate-feeding macrostomes, guished in the tanks, viz., the water and mud, and
and produces two types of resting cysts. the body surface of small metazoans, such as
Figs 14, 15. 18S rRNA sequence trees from some new bromelian
tank ciliates (neighbour-joining analysis). 14: The new genera
1 and 2 and Bromeliophrya brasiliensisform a new family related
to the Glaucomidae, represented by Glaucoma scintillans. The
new, gigantic (up to 800 µm) tetrahymenid ciliate, though having a
unique morphology, clusters close to Tetrahymena corlissi. The
numbers at nodes represent bootstrap percentages from 100 repli-
cates. The scale bar corresponds to 5 substitutions per 100 nu-
cleotide sequences. 15: Tamura-Nei evolutionary distances show
that the new colpodid ciliate belongs to the order Colpodida.
Figs 16–19. The three genera (Figs 17–19) of the new family Bromeliophryidae Foissner, 2003a evolved from a Glau-
coma scintillans-like ancestor (Fig. 16), according to both morphologic data and ribosomal gene sequences (Fig. 14).
The new genus 1 (Figs 3–5, 17), which looks like G. scintillansventrally (Figs 3, 16, 17), has an unciliated patch dorsal-
ly (Fig. 4) and forms macrostomes (Fig. 5). The ciliary rows of the new genus 2 (Fig. 18), which also has an unciliated
patch dorsally, are elongated preorally (arrow) and interrupted left laterally (asterisk). Bromeliophrya brasiliensis(Figs
6, 19), which has a large, unciliated patch each dorsally and left laterally (asterisk), possesses strongly elongated pre-
oral ciliary rows (arrow) and two short kinetofragments (arrowhead) which migrate from left to right during ontoge-
nesis, an outstanding feature previously not known in tetrahymenid ciliates (Foissner 2003a). Evolution within the
family Bromeliophryidae, composed of the genus Bromeliophryaand the new genera 1 and 2, is still obscure.

370 W.Foissner et al.
mosquito larvae and oligochaetes, where epizoic molecular markers than the 18S might represent
peritrichs are frequent. (2) Distribution of the new the morphological divergence more adequately.
species appears rather scattered, that is, only Lam- However, even identical 18S sequences of two
bornella trichoglossa was found at all sites investi- species a priori do not allow detailed predictions
gated (Table 1). (3) The tank bromeliad ciliate com- about the morphological similarity, as exemplified
munity consists of several endemic, undescribed by the minute 18S divergence of man and chim-
taxa and ordinary, cosmopolitan freshwater (e.g., panzee. With respect to the 18S sequences analysed
Halteria, Cinetochilum) and moss (e.g., Colpoda here, all tetrahymenids could be united in a single
spp., Drepanomonas spp., Leptopharynx) species. genus, notwithstanding their high morphological
True soil and euplanktonic species are rare (Table and ecological diversity. A similar, but less striking
1). (4) None of the new species was found in any of situation is obvious with the new colpodid, which
about 150 soil samples from Central and South appears as a typical member of the order Colpodi-
America. They also could not be recovered in two da, according to its morphology (Figs 9–12) and
dried and re-wetted tank mud samples from the evolutionary distances (Fig. 15), while 18S se-
Dominican Republic, although most of them pro- quence trees (not shown) classify it as a member of
duce resting cysts. On the other hand, the new the Grossglockneriida.
colpodid (genus 4) grows well when added to vari-
ous ordinary soil samples. (5) Garden bromeliads
Endemic ciliates in bromelian tanks
from two sites of the Dominican Republic had lost
the original ciliate community and were inhabited When one of us (W. Foissner) collected some
by pond and waste-water ciliates, indicating that water and mud from a ground bromelia in Brazil,
sometimes cleared waste-water was used for irriga- this was done only for fun because the mainstream
tion. (6) Most tank ciliates are bacteriophagous or ideology fostered the expectation that such small
feed, after transformation to macrostomes, on flag- biota should be inhabited by common, cosmopoli-
ellates (new genera 1, 2, 4). Trials to adapt the new tan ciliate species. However, the sample contained
colpodid to feed on small ciliates (Colpoda steinii, two new taxa (Foissner 2003a, b), and further sam-
Tetrahymena) failed. Large species, such as Lam- ples provided many other new species, disproving
bornella trichoglossaand the new genus 3 feed on a the widespread, old hypothesis that, in the micro-
variety of protists and small metazoans; genus 3 is bial world, “everything is everywhere, the envi-
even cannibalistic. ronment selects”. Some of these new species, viz.,
the large, Paramecium-feeding tetrahymenid pre-
sented here and the 200 µm long Lambornella tri-
Discussion choglossa Foissner (2003b) are too conspicuous to
assume that they were overlooked in Europe (Figs
1, 2, 7). Thus, the little ponds in the cisterns of
Contrasting morphological and
bromelian plants add significant evidence for the
molecular classifications
occurrence of free-living protists with restricted,
We shall discuss here mainly the gigantic geographic distribution (for reviews, see Foissner
tetrahymenid ciliate (= new genus 3) because it is 1999 and Foissner et al. 2002).
the most informative example. Morphological and There are 2000–3000 bromelia species, many of
molecular data both support the assignment to the which have special lifestyles and grow in extreme
tetrahymenine hymenostomes (Fig. 14). However, environments, such as the tepuis in Venezuela and
a comparison of the 18S sequence with those avail- the Andean semi-deserts (Martinelli 2000). We in-
able in the public data bank shows that this species vestigated less than 20 bromelia species from only
is very closely related to Tetrahymena corlissi, a eight sites, but found at least 10 new species (Table
small, possibly ubiquitous ciliate. This contrasts 1). Since samples were taken just once and from a
sharply with the morphological and ecological few plants only, it is likely that merely a tiny fraction
data, which suggest at least a distinct family for this of the species actually present was encountered.
peculiar ciliate, especially if the differences are Common sense suggests that the highly compart-
compared with those found in other tetrahymenid mentalized and diverse bromelian tank ecosystem
families, for instance, the Tetrahymenidae and will host hundreds, perhaps thousands of novel cili-
Glaucomidae (Lynn 1994). Potentially, other ate species, as do soils globally (Foissner et al. 2002).

Endemic ciliates from tank bromeliads 371
Ecology and selective forces chously ciliated, Glaucoma-like ancestor (Fig. 14),
possibly from an ancestor shared with Glaucoma
Although the bromelian tank ciliate community scintillans, a very frequent, euryoecious cos-
has an original character due to those species not mopolitan (Foissner et al. 1994). Commencing
found elsewhere, it likely evolved from cos- with G. scintillans, the following features gradually
mopolitan pond and moss ciliate biota, as indicated increase/change, reaching a maximum in Brome-
by the frequent occurrence of bacteriophagous liophrya brasiliensis (Figs 16–19): the length and
tetrahymenids, epizoic peritrichs, and euryoecious curvature of the right side preoral ciliary rows, the
species of the genus Colpoda. Typical soil inhabi- reduction of the somatic ciliature, the body asym-
tants are rare. This matches the observation that metry, and the length of adoral membranelle 3.
we could not find any of the new bromelian ciliates
Unfortunately, the sequence data (Fig. 14) do not
in about 150 soil samples from Central and South
follow this “straight” line, and a cladistic analysis
America. Interestingly, the bromelian tank ciliate
of the morphological features (not shown) also
community is also highly different from that
gives doubtful results. Further, the proposed stem-
found in astatic road and meadow puddles (Gelei
species, G. scintillans, is rather speculative because
1954; Dingfelder 1962), mainly due to the rarity or
the silverline pattern and the ability to transform
lack of nassulids (likely because filamentous
the oral apparatus match G. ferox better, a species
cyanobacteria are rare), colpodid marynids, rapa-
whose geographic origin is, unfortunately, un-
cious haptorids, and euplanktonic stichotrich hy-
known (Puytorac et al. 1973). There is also con-
potrichs.
spicuous parallelism: the preoral ciliary patterns of
The new ciliates occurring in bromelian tanks
the Bromeliophryidae are highly similar to those
are basically similar to those found in ordinary
found in the genera Dexiostoma, Paracolpidium,
limnetic habitats, but frequently represent new
and Colpidium of the tetrahymenid family Tu-
genera and families; these could suggest a long, in-
raniellidae (for reviews, see Ganner and Foissner
dependent evolution, which matches the age of the
1989; Lynn 1994).
bromelian plant family documented to date from
at least 65 million years ago (Sitte et al. 1991). Mor-
Acknowledgements: The technical assistance of Dr.
phology suggests at least two selective forces. The
Brigitte Moser and Dr. Eva Herzog is greatly acknowl-
ability to switch between bacteriophagous micro-
edged. The study was supported by the Austrian Sci-
stomes and predaceous macrostomes (Figs 3, 5) ence Foundation (FWF), Project P–15017, and by the
and the overall changes in the oral structures, even NSERC Canada.
those found in the large tetrahymenid (Figs 7, 8),
become understandable when the habitat is con-
References
sidered. It desiccates during dry periods (thus,
many of the species can form resting cysts), where-
Carrias J.-F., Cussac M.-E. and Corbara B. (2001): A prelimi-
by intra- and interspecific competition must be- nary study of freshwater protozoa in tank bromeliads. J.
come extremely high due to the decreasing space Trop. Ecol. 17, 611–617.
Dingfelder J. H. (1962): Die Ciliaten vorübergehender
and resources. More difficult to understand are the
Gewässer. Arch. Protistenkd. 105, 509–658.
rather pronounced changes in body shape and so-
Esteves C. B. and da Silva Neto I. D. (1996): Study of Hy-
matic ciliary pattern because they have no obvious menostomatida ciliates found in water tanks of Bromeli-
ecological advantage and the somatic ciliary pat- aceae from Bracuhy Port, Angra dos Reis, Rio de Janeiro.
tern is usually much more stable than the oral one. Mem. Inst. Osw. Cruz 91 (Suppl.), 63 (abstract).
Foissner W. (1991): Basic light and scanning electron micro-
Probably, these changes are caused by long spatial
scopic methods for taxonomic studies of ciliated protozoa.
isolation and/or the substances secreted by the Europ. J. Protistol. 27, 313–330.
bromelian leaves into the tank water. Foissner W. (1998): An updated compilation of world soil cili-
ates (Protozoa, Ciliophora), with ecological notes, new
records, and descriptions of new species. Europ. J. Protis-
The Bromeliophryidae,an impressive example tol. 34, 195–235.
Foissner W. (1999): Protist diversity: estimates of the near-im-
of ciliate evolution
ponderable. Protist 150, 363–368.
Foissner W. (2003a): Morphology and ontogenesis of Brome-
When looking at the three known species of the
liophrya brasiliensisgen. n., sp. n., a new ciliate (Protozoa:
family Bromeliophryidae and the sequence data, it
Ciliophora) from Brazilian tank bromeliads (Bromeli-
becomes obvious that they evolved from a holotri- aceae). Acta Protozool. 42, 55–70.

372 W.Foissner et al.
Foissner W. (2003b): Morphology and ontogenesis of Lam- Laessle A. M. (1961): A micro-limnological study of Jamaican
bornella trichoglossanov. spec., a new tetrahymenid ciliate bromeliads. Ecology 42, 499–517.
(Protozoa, Ciliophora) from Brasilian tank bromeliads Little T. J. and Hebert P. D. N. (1996): Endemism and ecolog-
(Bromeliaceae). Europ. J. Protistol. 39, 63–82. ical islands: the ostracods from Jamaican brom liads.
Foissner W. and Cordeiro T. (2000): A new, peculiar colpodid Freshwat. Biol. 36, 327–338.
ciliate from the tanks of a Brasilian bromeliad. J. Eukary- Lynn D. H. (1994): Ordre des Tetrahymenida Fauré-Fremiet
ot. Microbiol. 47 (Suppl.), 9A, abstract 69. in Corliss, 1956. Traité Zool. 2(2), 791–812.
Foissner W., Berger H. and Kohmann F. (1994): Taxonomi- Maguire B., Jr. (1971): Phytotelmata: biota and community
sche und ökologische Revision der Ciliaten des Saprobien- structure determination in plant-held waters. Ann. Rev.
systems – Band III: Hymenostomata, Prostomatida, Nas- Ecol. Syst. 2, 439–464.
sulida. Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Martinelli G. (2000): Gefährdete Raritäten. Bromelien im at-
Wasserwirtschaft 1/94, 1–548. lantischen Regenwald. Spektrum der Wissenschaft 6/2000,
Foissner W., Agatha S. and Berger H. (2002): Soil ciliates (Pro- 66–73.
tozoa, Ciliophora) from Namibia (Southwest Africa), Picado C. (1913): Les broméliacees épiphytes. Considerées
with emphasis on two contrasting environments, the comme milieu biologique (1). Bull. scient. Fr. Belg. 47,
Etosha region and the Namib Desert. Denisia 5, 1–1459. 215–360.
Ganner B. and Foissner W. (1989): Taxonomy and ecology of Puytorac P. de, Savoie A. and Roque M. (1973): Observations
some ciliates (Protozoa, Ciliophora) of the saprobic sys- cytologiques et biologiques sur le cilié polymorphe Glau-
tem. III. Revision of the genera Colpidium and Dexio- coma ferox Savoie et de Puytorac 1971. Protistologica 9,
stoma, and establishment of a new genus, Paracolpidium 45–63.
nov. gen. Hydrobiologia 182, 181–218. Schönborn W. (2003): Lehrbuch der Limnologie. Schweitzer-
Gelei J. (1954): Über die Lebensgemeinschaft einiger tem- bart, Stuttgart.
porärer Tümpel auf einer Bergwiese im Börzsönygebirge Sitte P., Ziegler H., Ehrendorfer F. and Bresinsky A. (1991):
(Oberungarn) III. Ciliaten. Acta biol. hung. 5, 259–343. Lehrbuch der Botanik. 33thed. G. Fischer, Stuttgart, Jena,
Janetzky W. and Vareschi E. (1992): Phytotelmata in bromeliads New York.
as microhabitats for limnetic organisms. In: Animal-Plant Torres-Stolzenberg V. (2000): Procta em associacao com
Interactions in Tropical Environments (Eds. W. Barthlott, Vrieseasp. (Bromeliaceae): tres novos taxa de amebas tes-
C.M. Naumann, K. Schmidt-Loske, K. L. Schuchmann). taceas (Protoctista: Rhizopoda, Testacealobosea). Not.
Results of the Annual Meeting of the German Society for Faun. Gembloux 41, 105–113.
Tropical Ecology, Bonn 1992, Zoologisches Forschungsin- Van Oye P. (1923): De mikrofauna en flora der bladtrechters
stitut und Museum Alexander Koenig, 199–209. van Bromeliacea. Natuurwet. Tijdschr. 5, 179–182.

