Bayerisches Landesamt fü r Wasserwrrtschaft
(He rausgeber und Verlag) ' München 1999
Bavarian State Office for Water Management
(Editor and Publisher) ' Munich 1999
ldentification and Ecolo gy of
Limnetic Plankton Ciliates
W. Foissner, H. Berger, ). Schaumbu rg
nformationsberichte Heft /99
3
I
Reports lssue 3/99

Informationsberichte des Bayerischen Landesamtes fürWasserwirtschaft-ISSN ot76-4217
Issue 3199
Munich, November 1999 - ISBN 3-930253-79-8
793 pages,2783 figures, 59 tables, printed on chloride-free bleached paper
Editor: Bayerisches Landesamt für Wasserwirtschaft, Lazarettstraße 67, D-80636 München,
eine Behörde im Geschäftsbereich des Bayerischen Staatsministeriums für Landesentwicklung
und Umweltfragen
Bavarian State Office for Water Management, Lazarettstraße 67, D-80636 Munich,
a council of the Bavarian State Ministry for State Development and Environmental Affairs
Authors: Univ.-Prof. Dr. Wilhelm Foissner, Institut für Zoologie der Universität Salzburg
Dr. Helmut Berger, Technisches Büro für Ökologie, Salzburg
Dr. Jochen Schaumburg, Bayerisches Landesamt für Wasserwirtschaft
Figures: Al1 Figures from the archives of Prof. Dr. Foissner, Salzburg
Print: Bartels &Wemitz, München
Sale: Wasserwirtschaftsamt Deggendorf, P.O. Box 2060, 94460 Deggendorf
All Rights Reserved
@Bayerisches Landesamt für Wasserwirtschaft
No part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or utilized without prior
permission from the copyright owner
For nomenclatural purposes, this book should be referenced as follows:
Foissner, W., Berger, H., Schaumburg, J. (1999): Identification and Ecology of Limnetic Plankton Ciliates.
Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes flir Wasserwirtschaft, Heft 3 199, 793 pp.

Preface
Environment at present has become a key political issue in many major national fora, especially in most devel-
oped countries. The great interest of the general public sensitized Govemment decision-makers for the enormous
landscape and economic value of lakes, which are centres of local recreation and ecotourism. Environmentally
sound management of these " recreation centres ", which are frequently threatened by eutrophication (nutrient
enrichment) and toxic pollutants, requires an integrated approach, that is, permanent control of the chemical and
biological state.
Lakes are inhabited by thousands of different organisms, from viruses to fish. A major group of inhabitants are
single-celled, microscopic organisms, the so-called Protozoa or Protista. It is only within the past two decades
that limnologists and marine biologists recognized the great importance of protozoa, especially heterotrophic
flagellates and ciliates, in the pelagic food web, that is, in cycling carbon and nutrients, such as nitrogen and
phosphorus, by grazing most of the bacterial production. Accordingly, flagellates and ciliates play a vital and
useful role in the indication and prevention of lake pollution. It is thus unfortunate that current practices for envi-
ronmental impact assessments and overall lake evaluation largely neglect protozoa. Although financial con-
straints may have contributed to this ignorance, it was certainly mainly due to the lack of an easy-to-use identifi-
cation guide. The book by Professor Foissner's group provides, for the first time, such a comprehensive guide to
plankton ciliates and may help to make these organisms more popular in biodiversity, pollution, and conservation
issues. It supplements in some way the "Ciliate Atlas", a unique guide to the ciliates used as bioindicators in run-
ning waters. The Ciliate Atlas, written by Foissner's group between 199l-1995, was so successful that it had to
be reprinted to comply with the requests.
Adequate knowledge of what lives in lakes, and especially why it lives in a certain lake, is still very limited. Sev-
eral new genera and species are described in this book, showing our ignorance ofeven the local biodiversity. It is
expected that this monograph will substantially stimulate descriptive and ecological research on plankton ciliates
for the benefit of both basic science and applied limnology. Very likely, hundreds of new species with interesting
morphological and physiological adaptations wait to be discovered, especially in underinvestigated biotopes,
such as salt lakes and floodplains.
The authors collected and critically reviewed the widely distributed literature on plankton ciliates and supple-
mented these data with a vast amount of original investigations. This materialized in a truly outstanding mono-
graph, whose comprehensiveness, English language, cheap price, and - last but not least - attractive illustration
and high printing quality should ensure wide dissemination. The book is intended for use by people without spe-
cific knowledge about ciliates, but also useful for researchers and persons with an environmental background.
Certainly, it will also be helpful in training courses on basic and applied limnology, as well as in biodiversity re-
search and conservation.
Bavarian State Office for Water Management
Munich, May 1999
Dipl.-Ing. Müller
President

The Colour of Plankton Ciliates
l: Linuostronbidiunt viritle,an oligotrich ciliate, is yellowgreen due to cleptoplasts.2: Pelagostrontbitliunrlallu.r, an oligo-
trich ciliate, is orange due to many minute cytoplasmic granules. 3t Codonella cratera and Tintinnidium fluviatile are oligo-
trich ciliates living in a lorica, which is yellowish due to attached organic debris. 4: Pelagostrombidium mirabile, an oligo-
trich ciliate, is green due to ingested algae. 5: Strombidium purpureum, an oligotrich ciliate from brackish water, is purple
due to red endosymbiotic sulphur bacteria. 6: Myrionecta rubra, a marine, gymnostome ciliate, is redish due to crypto-
phycean endosymbionts.T: Mesodinium pulex, a gymnostome ciliate, is gteenish due to ingested algae. 8: Coleps hirtus viri-
dis, a prostome ciliate, is green due to symbiotic algae (zoochlorellae). 9: Pelagohalteria viridis, an oligotrich ciliate, is
green due to symbiotic algae (zoochlorellae). L0: Epistylis procumbens, a colonial peritrichous ciliate, is a colourless bacte-
ria feeder. All micrographs from live specimens. Figures I and 3 kindly supplied by Martin KREUTZ (Constance,
Germany), all other figures kindly supplied by Tore LINDHOLM (Abo University, Finland).

Contents
Preface
Contents
INTRODUCTION .......
1 7
) CONCEPT .....
INVESTIGATION OF PLANKTON CILIATES AND SPECIES 9
,a
2.L Sampling and Counting ... ..... 9
Protozoa ........
2.2 MethodsforTaxonomic Studiesandldentification of Ciliated 10
Concept ........
2.3 Species 27
GENERALECOLOGY .......29
3
Introduction .....
3.1 29
Adaptations .....
3.2 29
Productivity ....
3.3 Abundance, Biomass, 32
CystsandParasites .....
3.4 35
... .......
3.5 Communities 36
Diversity ........
3.6 55
. .......
3.7 Ecological Characterization of theSpeciesDescribedin this Book 60
....
4 TDENTIFICATION, DESCRIPTION AND ECOLOGY OF SPECIES 65
4.1 Key to Main Groups and Species . . . . 65
4.2 How to Use the Monograph 108
4.3 Nomenclatural Summary .... 110
4.4 Description and Ecology of Species 111
4.4.1 Gymnostom ater (26 species) 111
Genus Actinobolina (4 species) tt2
Genus Belonophrya (1 species) t24
Genus Mesodinium (2 species) t34
Genus Askenasia (3 species) t47
Geruts Rhabdoaskenasia (1 species) 161
Genus Liliimorpha (l species) t64
Gerus Didinium (2 species) t61
Genus Monodinium (4 species) fl8
Genus Cyclotrichium (l species) 205
Geruts Pelagovasicola (1 species) 2r3
Gents Paradileptus (1 species) 221
(l
Gerrus Pelagodileptus species) 232
Gents T euthophry s ( 1 species) 238
Getus Balantidion (l species) 252
Gents lngynophrya (1 species) 258
(l
Gemts Lepidotachelophyllum species) . . . . 262
Getus Pelagolacrymaria (1 species) 265
4.4.2 Prostomatida (25 species) and Hymenostomata (6 species) 272
Genus Coleps (4 species) 213
Genus Urotricha (13 species) 301
Genus Balanion (1 species) 363
Genus Longitricha (l species) 368
Genus Bursellopsis (4 species) 37r
Genus Pelagothrix (2 species) 395
Genus Disemqtostoma (2 species) 409
Genus Frontonra (1 species) 4t6
Genus llisliobalantium (1 species) 424

Geruts MaritzTa (1 species) 43t
Genus,S/ofresia(1 species) .. j... 439
4.4.3 Peritrichia (20 species) 450
Genus Astylozoon (3 species) 453
Genus Hastatella (l species) 460
.
(l
Genus Opisthonecta species) . 461
.
Genus Trichodina (l species) . 472
.
Genus Pelagovorticella (2 species) 480
.
Genus Vorticella (3 species) 486
.
Genus Pseudohaplocaulus (l species) . 501
.
Genus E,picarchesium (1 species) 508
Genus Epistylis (4 species) . 515
.
Genus Ophrydium (3 species) 540
4.4.4 Spirotrichea (Oligotrichida, Heterotrichida, Hypotrichia, 27 species) .. o. o. o... o..... 553
Genus Halteria (2 species) . 554
.
Genus P elagohalteria (2 species) . 566
Genus Limnostrombidium (2 species) 5t4
Genus P elagostrombidium (2 species) 585
Genus Rimostrombidium (6 species) 595
Genus Codonella (l species) 617
.
Genus Membranicola (1 species) 626
Genus Tintinnidium (3 species) 636
(l
Genus Tintinnopsis species) . 648
.
Genus Linostomella (1 species) I 655
Genus Stentor (2 species) 662
Genus Hypotrichidium (l species) . 671
.
Genus Pelagotrichidium (I species) 683
.
Genus Pseudostrombidium (I species) 685
.
(l
Genus Spiretella species) 688
..:......:
4.4.5 Cyrtophorida (1 species), Nassulida (1 species), Colpodea tsrp."i;;i 692
GenusPhascolodon(lspecies) .......693
(l species) .
Geruts Obertrumia . 700
GemtsBursaridium(lspecies) .......109
GentsColpoda(l species) ..... ...... 714
GerutsCyrtolophosis(lspecies) ......718
4.4.6 Suctoria (3 species) .... 723
(l species) .
Gents Mucophrya . 123
species) ...125
GenusGajewskajophrya(l
GettsStaurophrya(lspecies) .......727
5 GLOSSARY TO CILIATE MORPHOLOGY ...... 73I
6 LITERATURE .. ...... 735
INDEX ..
7 777
Index of the Informationsberichte des Bayerischen Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft

TNTRODT]CTION
Ecology of planktonic protozoa has attained a high standard in terms of methods and interpretation of data. Even
minor details are investigated with sophisticated techniques and at considerable expense. If, however, one looks
at the identification of the organisms involved, the standard is often poorer than it was 50 years ago. It seems
many ecologists forget that they are dealing with organisms. This deficiency seriously limits the usefulness of the
data of, for example, grazing experiments and the analysis of community dynamics. If the species involved are
not thoroughly identified and differences to other described populations are not mentioned, the data will hardly
be reproducible because each species, and perhaps most populations of a certain species, has special ecological
requirements. This has been shown, very recently and impressively, by WEISSE & MONTAGNES (1998) in
Urotricha. Likewise, the food organisms must be thoroughly identified. AUSTIN et al. (1990), for instance,
showed that a non-mucoid variant of the bacteriw Pseudomonas solanacearum is more readily ingested than a
mucoid wild strain.
Main subjects in current protozooplankton research are seasonal successions and community structures. It are
just these areas, where reliable results largely depend on complete species inventories and correct identifications.
One can hardly speak, as is usual during meetings and in many papers, of "community structure" and "seasonal
succession" if only l0 Vo of the species seen (sic!) were identified to genus or species leveMmagine a meeting of
botanists dealing with the community structure and the seasonal succession of plant assemblages. What would
happen if, as is usual at meetings of protozoan plankton ecologists, you were to speak of red flowers, blue flow-
ers (e.g. "oligotrichs"), high trees and small trees ("protists larger than 20pm"), and of the changes in the num-
bers of red and blue flowers during the season? We are sure the reaction of your botanist colleagues would be
less than favourable.
However, not only ecologists are challenged but equally also taxonomists. Our overwhelming impression from
25 years' work on taxonomy of free-living protists (mainly ciliates and testate amoebae) and from reviewing
many manuscripts is that the main problem is always the same, viz. superficial species descriptions and incom-
plete genus and family revisions. We also had to learn that many scientists from other fields think that taxono-
mists are people who are unable to do better research - so they do taxonomy. Unfortunately, they are not entirely
wrong in having such misgivings concerning taxonomy and taxonomists. There are still quite a lot of poor de-
scriptions and revisions published, even in international journals, either because the reviewers were incompetent
or unduly lenient out of personal consideration. Sometimes it seems that people do species descriptions (= alpha
taxonomy) merely for the thrill of having their names behind a species name!
Certainly, it depends on the scale of the investigation whether species identification is important or not. It is pos-
sibly less crucial if energy fluxes are studied, but it is important for many components of the fluxes, such as graz-
ing and growth rates. The rarity of ecological papers with a reliable taxonomy is not caused, as is often main-
tained, by financial restrictions ("there is no money for taxonomy") but by the one-sided view of the project lead-
ers, who are usually ecologists and often not really interested in the names of the organisms involved. We hope
these controversial lines will stimulate chairs of ecological institutes and project leaders to support young people
who are interested in taxonomy, not only by lip service but also by giving them fair career opportunities.
Hopefully, the present book, on which we worked for three years, not only shows how taxonomy and revisions
should be performed, but also will contribute to make identifications more usual and reliable in protozooplankton
science.

I
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are indebted to several persons for concrete assistance during the preparation of this book. Specifically we
must at least mention our deep gratitude to Brigitte Moser, Dr Eva Herzog, and Dr. Bruno Ganner for technical
assistance; to Dr Remigius Geiser for help with nomenclature; to Mag Eric Strobl for improving the English; to
Dipl Ing (FH) Annette Bauer, Hannelore Muck, Dorothee Schall, Marion Wunderer, and Helmut Schmid for edi-
torial assistance. Several persons kindly supplied us with original micrographs; they are named at the appropriate
pages. The financial support of the Bavarian State Office for Water Management is greatly acknowledged.
The thousands of figures comprising the plates are either originals or reproductions from widely scattered
sources in the vast protozoological literature of the past 250 years. Specific acknowledgements are generally
made in the explanations of figures: there are named the authors of the papers in which the illustrations originally
appeared.

) INVESTIGATION OF PLANKTON CILIATES AND SPECIES
,a
CONCEPT
2.1 Sampling and Counting
It is beyond the scope of this book to provide detailed information about these subjects because sampling and
counting of plankton ciliates are performed with classical limnological methods. Thus, the reader is referred to
textbooks on limnology. Some specific problems will be discussed in the following paragraphs.
Qualitative sampling for identification must be performed with very fine-meshed (10-20 pm) plankton nets be-
cause many species are very small and flexible: up to 50 pm-sized specimens may pass through a 12 pm net, if
45
Halteria
35
Bq
25
0)
äo
)a d.( 15
,q
()
o 5
E
-5
F(o
-15 Colpidium
-25
-35
LUG MER GLU FOR LUG MER GLU FOR
40
30 Urotricha
§
20
o
äo
tr 10
t€rl
o
0
o
Hd
Fl -10
F{o
Halteria
-20
on algae
-30
-40
LUG MER GLU FOR LUG MER GLU FOR
Fig. 2.1. Differences in cell volumes of living and preserved ciliates as percentage of live volumes (mean differences and 95 70 confidence limits.
From WIACKOWSKI et al. 1994). Black bars: results soon after fixation. grey: I montlr later, and white: 2 months later. LUG = acid Lugol's,
MER = mercuric chloride, GLU = glutaraldehyde, FOR = formaldehyde.

Investigation ofPlankton Ciliates and Species Concept
they are slender and flexible! Mild centrifugation (about 1500 rot. min-r for 30-60 s) is survived by most species
and must be used to collect rare andlor very small species, which usually escape even a 10 pm net. Large species
(>120 pm) should be collected with micropipettes under the dissecting microscope; usually, they do not with-
stand even mild centrifugation. Most species are very sensitive to temperature changes; thus, take care to keep
samples cold, respectively, at the actual temperature.
Quantitative sampling and counting are performed with classical limnological methods, for instance, a Ruttner
bottle and the Utermöhl technique. However, whenever it is possible, live counts should be preferred because
they are fast and more reliable than conventional techniques with preserved material (DALE & BURKILL 1982,
SIME-NGANDO et al. 1990). Furthermore, identification is easier and biomass estimations are more reliable
(see below). More recently, quantitative protargol stains (QPS) are preferred by many protozoan ecologists be-
cause preserved material can be used and identification to at least genus level is often possible. See MONTAG-
NES & LYNN (1987, 1993) and SKIBBE (1994) for detailed protocols. Some workers prefer ordinary cytologi-
cal stains (BERECZKY 1985).
Commonly used preservatives are acid Lugol solution (1 Vo vlv), mercuric chloride (2.5 Vo w/v), glutaraldehyde
(0.5 Vo v/v), and unbuffered formaldehyde (2 Vo w/v). Unfortunately, these fixatives preserve ciliates rather
poorly, at least in the concentrations used. This may explain the paucity of large plankton ciliates in the species
listsl Most of the large plankton ciliates, and there are many (!), are rather fragile and even difficult to preserve
with the fixatives used by taxonomists. Accordingly, abundances and especially biomasses of plankton ciliates
are very likely greatly underestimated at present! Note that specimens dissolve more or less completely in the
fixatives mentioned above, if samples are stored to long. SIME-NGANDO & GROLIERE (1991) reported mean
of l.2Vo, 16.4% and 30.1 qo respectively after 3,6 and 9 month of storage. Similar results were obtained by
STOECKER et al. (1994).
Preserved material usually shrinks, but may also become inflated (Fie.2.l). CHOI & STOECKER (1989) and
MÜLLER & GELLER (1993) reported shrinkage rates between 30 and '70 o/o. Such rates are common and must
be taken into account in biomass estimations and identification. Unfortunately, an overall conversion factor can
not be provided because the extent of shrinkage or inflation highly depends on many factors, such as kind of spe-
cies and storage time of the sample. Silver methods also change cell volume. Usually, specimens shrink: 5-10 7o
of body length with silver nitrate methods; 1020 7o with protargol methods (however, with protocol B, speci-
mens may become inflated); silver carbonate, in contrast, often causes swelling of the cells.
Certainly, shrinkage and swelling of specimens pose serious problems on biomass estimations. Thus, live speci-
mens should be measured, whenever this is possible. Table 3.10 provides live biomasses for the species con-
tained in this book. They were calculated from the common live size of the individual species. Although there
may be considerable variation in size of specimens from different sites, our values are probably more reliable
than those obtained from preserved and/or stained cells.
2.2
Methods for Taxonomic Studies and Identification of Ciliated Protozoa
This chapter is an update of the review by FOISSNER (1991). Basically, methods did not change since that time.
However, we learned and changed two important things:
Abandon isopropanol from your laboratory and use ethanoMsopropanol is now denaturated by a sub-
stance, which causes silver nitrate preparations to bleach more or less completely within a few days or
weeks.
The protargol now available from MERCK does not work! FOISSNER informed the cornpany, but did
not get appropriate response. Thus, try to get old (before 1997) protargol either from the MERCK
company or from ROQUES, Paris.
10

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
Table 2.1. Structures revealed by the methods described.
Structures revealed live methyl Klein- Chatton- silver protargol SEM
observation green- Foissner Lwoff carbonate
pyronin silver nitrate silver nitrate
Shape ++ ++
Nuclear apparatus + ++
Contractile vacuole ++
Excretory pore, cytopyge +l- ++ +l-
Colour ++
Mucocysts + ++l- +l- +l- ++l-
Trichocysts, toxicysts ++ ++l- +l- +l- ++l-
Cortical granulesr ++l- ++l- +l-
Ciliary pattern (basal bodies and cilia) +l- + ++
Silverline system ++l-
Cortical fibres2 ++
Cytoplasmic fibres (e.g., myonemes, +l- ++l-
pharyngeal rods and fibres)
Surface ornamentation +l-
Symbiotic algae ++
r"Cortical granules" include various extrusive (especiatly mucocysts or mucocyst-like extrusomes) and non-extrusive structures. They are
most prominent and important (and often non-extrusive) in several hypotrichs.
2 Two main types can be distinguished: those associated with the basal bodies (e.g., kinetodesmal fibres, transverse and postciliary microtu-
bular ribbons) and those located in the cortical-cytoplasmic boundary (e.g., the "infraciliary lattice" in several peniculines and holophryids).
(+) good, (+ +) excellent, (+l , ++l ) sometimes, that is, depends on species, (-) not revealed or poorly preserved.
Structures Revealed by the Methods Described and Interpretation of Silver Stains
There is no single method which can reveal all details necessary for a good description of a ciliate. Likewise, no
staining method is equally appropriate to all kinds of ciliates. Good descriptions usually demand, as is evident
from Tables 2.1 and 2.2, at least live observation, silver nitrate and protargol or silver carbonate impregnation.
The brilliancy of silver preparations has unfortunately recently tempted some taxonomists to neglect live obser-
vation. However, many important species characters cannot be seen or are changed in silvered specimens such
that species descriptions based exclusively on silver slides are incomplete and of doubtful value for o,-taxono-
mists and ecologists. Especially the latter are usually not trained to correlate the silvered structures with the live
appearance of the cell. Whenever it is possible, important and/or unusual details (for example, species characters)
should be documented not only by accurate drawings but also by photographs.
Several species (e.g., in the genera Pseudoprorodon and Stentor) persistently withstand our methods, their infra-
ciliature and/or silverline system impregnates poorly or not at all. Further improvements of existing methods or
new techniques should therefore be developed. Stimulating ideas can be found in the papers of J. GELEI (1934,
1935), G. GELEr (1939) and HORVÄTH (1938).
The methods described here work not only with ciliates but also with many heterotrophic and autotrophic flagel-
lated protists.
Usually, silver staining is undertaken to reveal the infraciliature (= ciliary pattern) and the silverline system (-
lines revealed by silver nitrate, connecting basal bodies and other cortical organelles such as extrusomes and the
cyropyge). Extrusomes, various structures associated with the basal bodies of the cilia (e.g., parasomal sacs, mi-
crotubular ribbons) and other cortical fibrillar networks (e.g., the infraciliary lattice) are sometimes also impreg-
nated. This may render interpretation of silver stains difficult. It is beyond the scope of this book to discuss this
problem in detail; in fact, interpretation is different for each method (and even of slight variations!) and almost
for each higher systematic category. Thus, we must refer the reader to some key-references mentioned in FOISS-
11

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
Table 2.2. Methods for studying the infraciliature (ciliary pattem) and the silverline system of certain groups of
ciliates (systematics after CORLISS 1979).
Taxa Klein- Chatton- silver protargol
Lwoff
Foissner carbonate
silver nitrate silver nitrate
Karyorelictida (e.g.,,Trachelocerca, Loxodes;usually difficult to impregnate; + ++
special method available [FOISSNER & DRAGESCO 1996])
Archistomatina (e.g. , Alloiozona, Didesmis) ? + + +
Prostomatina (e.g. , Holophrya, -+ Urotricha, + Coleps) + ++ ++ +
Haptorida (e.g., Enchelys, Spathidium, -) Didinium, -; Paradileptus) + +l- ++l-
Pleurostomatida (e.9., Amphileptus, Loxophyllum) +l- + ++
Trichostomata (e.g., P lagiopyla, Spirozona, Balantidium, P araisotricha ; + + + +
special method available [WOLSKA 1966))
Entodiniomorphida (e.g., Ophryoscolex, Cycloposthium) ? + + +
Colpodids (e.g., -) Colpoda, Woodrffia, --> Bursaridium) + ++ ++ +
Synhymeniidae (e.g., I',1 assulopsis, C hilodontopsis) + + +l- ++ +l-
Nassulina (e.g. , IYassula, ) Ohertrumia, Furgasonia) +l- + ++
Microthoracina (e.g., Microthorax, Leptopharynx) ++ + +l- ++
Cyrtophorida (e.g. , Chilodonella, Trochilia, --) Phascolodon) ++ + + ++
Chonotrichida (e.g. ,, Spirochona; few data available) + ? ++
Rhynchodida (e.g., Ancistroc oma, Sphenophrya) ++ + ? +
Apostomatida (e.g. , Hyalophysa, Ascophrys) ? + ? +
Suctoria (adults) + +
Suctoria (swarmers) + + ++ ++
Tetrahymenina (e.g. , Tetrahymena, Colpidium, Glaucoma) ++ ++ ++ ++
Ophryoglenina (e.g., Ophryo glena, I c hthyophthirius) + + + +l- +
Peniculina (e.g., + Frontonia, -+ Stokesia, Paramecium, Lembadion) ++ ++ ++
Scuticociliatida (e.g.,, U roneffia, Loxocephalus, -+ H istiobalantium) + ++ + ++
Astomatida (e.g., Anoplophrya, H oplitophrya) ++ +l- + +
Peritrichida (e.g., + Vorticella, Opercularia, -+ Trichodina) ++ *l- + ++
Heterotrichida (e.g. , Blepharisma, + Stentor, Folliculina) + ++ ++
Odontostomatida (e.g., Epalxella, Saprodinium) + + + +
Oligotrichida (e.g. , -) Halteria, -+ Limnostrombidium, -+ Tintinnidium) +l- + +l- ++
Hypotrichida (e.g. -+ P seudostrombidium; ++
Euplotidae and Aspidiscidae excluded)
Hypotrichida (Euplotidae and Aspidiscidae) ++ ++ +l- ++
(+) recommended, (+ +) highly recommended , (+/-, + +/-) sometimes useful, depends on species, (-) not recommended.
NER (1991). The differentiation of mono- and dikinetids must be mentioned because this is of basic importance
for successful taxonomic work.
Cilia and their basal bodies may be arranged singly (monokinetids) or in pairs (dikinetids); the basal bodies may
be ciliated or non-ciliated (e.g., FOISSNER & FOISSNER 1988). All silver methods described here reveal at
least the basal bodies (cilia are usually not impregnated with the silver nitrate methods!), but not each black or
brown granule is a basal body of a cilium! Depending on the procedure used, other structures which have a simi-
lar size as the basal bodies are also impregnated (e.g., parasomal sacs, extrusomes). Thus, the arrangement and
the state (mono- or dikinetids) of the basal bodies cannot be unequivocally ascertained with silver methods, and
transmission electron microscopy is necessary (SEM is insufficient as it often does not reveal non-ciliated basal
bodies!). The following procedure provides a rather reliable differentiation of mono- and dikinetids and of cili-
ated and non-ciliated basal bodies. (i) Study cells carefully in vivo, preferably with interference contrast. With
some experience it is easy to see whether or not cilia are arranged in pairs. (ii) Overstain cells with protargol
and/or silver carbonate. In overimpregnated cells cilia are usually clearly recognizable. (iii) Non-ciliated basal
t2

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
e
Fig.2.2a4. Preparation of slides tbr observing living ciliates (fiom DRACESCO & DRAGESCO-KE RNetS t SSO).
Fig.2.2e. Staining jar for 8 and l6 (back to back) slides, respectively.
Fig.2.2f. Watch-glass for protargol protocol B and cleaning of ciliates for scanning electron microscopy.
bodies andlor parasomal sacs are often slightly smaller than ciliated basal bodies. (iv) Study the elecffon micro-
scopic literature related to the species or group of species under investigation and try to correlate the stained
structures with ultrastructural features.
Methods
Observing Living C iliates
Many physical and chemical methods have been described for retarding the movement of ciliates in order to ob-
serve structural details (see FOISSNER 1991 for literature). Chemical immobilization (e.g., nickel sulphate) or
physical slowing down by increasing the viscosity of the medium (e.g., methyl cellulose) are, in our experience,
usually unsuitable. These procedures often change the shape of the cell or cause premortal alterations of various
cell structures. The following simple method is therefore preferable: place about 0.5 ml of the raw sample on a
slide and pick out (collect) the desired specimens with a micropipette under a compound microscope equipped
with a low magnification (e.g., objective 4:1, eyepiece 10x). If specimens are large enough they can be picked
out from a petri dish under a dissecting microscope. Working with micropipettes, the diameter of which must be
adjusted to the size of the specimens, requires some training. Transfer the collected specimens, which are now in
a very small drop of fluid, onto a slide. Apply small dabs of Vaseline (Petroleum jelly) to each of the four comers
of a coverslip (or on the slide; it is useful to apply the jelly by an ordinary syringe with a thick needle). Place this
coverslip on the droplet containing the ciliates. Press on the vaselined comers with a mounted needle until cili-
ates are held firmly between slide and coverslip (Fi9.2.2a4). As the pressure is increased the ciliates gradually
become less mobile and more transparent. Hence, flrst the location of the main cell organelles (e.g., nuclear and
oral apparatus, contractile vacuole) and then the details (e.g., extrusomes, micronucleus) can easily be observed
under low (100-400x) and high (oil immersion objective) magnification.
The shape of the cells is of course altered by this procedure. Therefore, specimens taken directly from the sample
with a large-bore (opening - 1 mm) pipette must first be investigated under low magnification (10O-400x). Many
species are too fragile to withstand handling with the micropipette and coverslip trapping without deterioration. In-
vestigation with low magnification also requires some experience but it guarantees that undamaged cells are re-
t3

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
corded. Video-microscopy is very useful at this point of investigation, especially for the registration of the swim-
ming behaviour.
A compound microscope equipped with differential interference contrast is best for observing ciliates. If not
available, use bright-field or phase-contrast; the latter is only satisfactory for very flat species.
Staining Procedures
Although there are numerous methods for staining ciliates, most of the older procedures (e.g., hematoxylin; see
KIRBY 1950 for an excellent compilation of protocols) have been outdated by silver impregnation techniques
and electron microscopy. Various silver stains are available, but all need some experience and are usually indi-
vidually modified. However, familiarity with the four silver methods described below is an absolute prerequisite
for the description of ciliates. These are thus described in great detail in order also to give even beginners a fair
chance to obtain good slides.
Apart from silver impregnation, various other staining techniques are useful for taxonomic work with ciliates, es-
pecially the Feulgen nuclear reaction and supravital staining with methyl green-pyronin in order to reveal, re-
spectively, the nuclear apparatus and the mucocysts.
Simple, viz. molecular formulae are given for the chemicals used, since usually only these are found in the cata-
logues of the suppliers (e.g., MERCK). In a laboratory manual it is thus convincing to use this style too, instead
of the more correct constitutional or structural formulae.
I. Feulgen nuclear reaction. Descriptions of this method are to be found, e.g., in LEE et al. (1985) and
DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS (1986). The Feulgen reaction reveals the nuclear apparatus vei'y selec-
tively. We use it occasionally for o-taxonomic purposes because the nuclear apparatus usually stains well with
protargol. As protargol often stains various small cytoplasmic inclusions, too, some caution is necessary, espe-
cially with multimicronucleate species. If in doubt, use the Feulgen reaction or an other nuclear staining method,
such as that described by LARSEN (1975).
II. Supravital staining with methyl green-pyronin. This simple method is an exce[änt technique for revealing
the mucocysts of most ciliates (those of tetrahymenids, however, usually do not stain). Mucocysts are stained
deeply and very selectively blue or red, and can be observed in various stages of swelling because the cells are
not killed instantly. The nuclear apparatus is also stained.
Procedure
1.
Pick out desired ciliates with a micropipette and place the small drop of fluid in the centre of a slide.
2.
Add an equally sized drop of methyl green-pyronin and mix the two drops gently by swivelling the slide.
Remarks: If ciliates were already mounted under the coverslip then add a drop of the dye at one edge of the
coverslip and pass it through the preparation with a piece of filter paper placed at the other end of the cov-
erslip.
3.
Place a coverslip with vaselined corners on the preparation and squeeze specimens slightly.
Remarks:Observe immediately. Cells die in the stain within 2 minutes. Mucocysts stain very quickly and
many can be observed at various stages of swelling. To reveal the nuclear apparatus, cells should be fairly
strongly squashed (= flattened). The preparation is temporary. After 5-10 minutes the cytoplasm often be-
comes heavily stained and obscures other details.
Reagents
I g methyl green-pyronin (CHROMA-Gesellschaft, Küferstrasse 2,P.O. Box 1110, D-7316 Köngen)
ad 100 ml distilled water
This solution is very stable and can be used for years
III. The ("dry") Klein-Foissner silyer nitrate method. The dry methods ("dry" because cells are air-dried and
not chemically fixed before being treated with silver nitrate) provide preliminary information on the somatic and
oral infraciliature (- ciliary pattern) and are often best for revealing the silverline system (= lines revealed by sil-
14

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
ver nitrate and connecting basal bodies and other cortical organelles such as extrusomes and the cytopyge). Al-
though the results vary highly, the method is worthwhile because it is fast and often produces excellent prepara-
tions, which can be well documented since the cells are flattened during dehydration. Only cortical structures are
revealed.
Procedure
l.
Take 5-10 clean slides and spread a very thin layer of albumen over the middle third of each with a finger-
tip. Dry for at least I minute.
Remarks: The egg-albumen (remove germinal disk! do not add glycerol) must have been kept open in a
wide-necked flask for at least 20 hours; fresh albumen is often less satisfactory. It can be used for 2*3 days if
the flask is subsequently sealed; do not, however, stir before use, but skim the albumen from the surface with
a finger-tip. To facilitate spreading breathe on slide so that a film of condensation is produced on which the
albumen can glide. The albumen layer must be very thin and uniform and should not cover cells.
2. Place a drop of fluid containing the ciliates on the albumized slide, spread with a needle (do not touch albu-
men layer!) and dry preparation at room temperature.
Remarks: Even single specimens can be placed on the albumized slide with a micropipette. If necessary en-
rich ciliates by gentle centrifugation or by leaving sample to settle for a few hours, after which time oxygen
depletion induces many ciliates to move to the water surface. The amount and chemical composition of the
fluid with which the ciliates are air-dried as well as temperature and humidity greatly influence the results.
Therefore, 5-10 slides should usually be prepared simultaneously to vary these parameters, e.g. by washing
cells with different amounts of distilled water or fresh culture medium. Washing cells with distilled water or
spreading the drop to a very thin film is especially recommended with saline fluids, e.g. seawater, sewage,
hair-dryer.
and soils. Temperature and humidity are easily varied using an ordinary
l
3. Apply some drops of silver nitrate to the dried material for about I minute.
Remarks: Do not touch albumen layer with the pipette. The reaction time does not influence the results; a
minute is adequate.
4. Wash slides for about 3 seconds under distilled water and re-dry.
Remarks:Wash gently! Apply water current from the top third of the tilted slide so that water runs gently
over the dried material. Leave slides tilted during drying.
5. Pre-develop dried slide by exposing it for 5-60 seconds to a 40-60 watt electric bulb at a distance of
3-10 cm.
Remarks: Time and distance influence intensity of impregnation (sec also next step).
6. Apply a few drops ofdeveloper to the dried preparation for about 30-60 seconds.
Remarks: The pre-development (step 5), the composition of the developer, and the material itself influence
impregnation intensity, and quality. The best ratio of these parameters must be evaluated in pilot
experiments. If the developer is well adjusted, the albumen around the dried fluid turns brownblack; if the
developer is too strong, the albumen appears black (add some component A [see Reagents] andlor reduce
predeveloping time); if the developer is too weak, the albumen appears brownish (add some components B
and/or C and/or increase pre-development time). Preparations usually fade within a few weeks when the sil-
ver nitrate is reduced only by sunlight or an UV-lamp.
7. Pour developer off slide, rinse gently in tap water for 5-10 seconds and immerse in fixative (sodium thiosul-
phate).
8.
Remove slide from fixative, rinse gently in tap water for 5-10 seconds, and air-dry preparation again.
Remarks: Fixative must be thoroughly removed, otherwise crystals are formed and remain on the slide, caus-
ing the impregnation to fade with time. Do not wash too long and do not use distilled water, otherwise cells
swell eventually detaching from the slide! Slides should be tilted during drying.
9. Mount in synthetic neutral mounting medium (e.g., Eukitt, Euparal).
Remarks: Mounting medium should be of medium viscosity. The preparation is stable.
Reagents
a) Silver nitrate solution (long term stability in brown flask)
I g silver nitrate (AgNO:) dissolved in 100 ml distilled water
15

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
b) Developer (stable for about 1-3 days; most be renewed as soon as it tums dark brown or shows crystals; mix
components in the sequence indicated)
20 ml solution A
I ml solution B
I ml solution C
Solution A (this is an ordinary developer for negatives; dissolve ingredients in the sequence indicated; stable
for years in brown bottle)
1000 ml hot tap water (about 40'C)
10 g boric acid (H:BO:)
10 g
borax (NazB+O )
5 g
hydroquinone (CoHoOz)
100 g anhydrous sodium sulphite (NarSO3)
2.5 g
metol = methylamino-phenol-sulphate = (CH3NHC6HaOH)2. HzSO+
Solution B (this is a concentrated photography paper developer; dissolve ingredients in the sequence indi-
cated; stable for about 6 months in air-tight brown bottle; soon tums brown [oxidizes], which, however, does
not influence its activity)
100 ml distilled water
0.4 g
metol = methylamino-phenol-sulphate = (CH3NHC6TI4OH)z.HzSO+
5.2 g
anhydrous sodium sulphite (NarSO3)
1.2 g
hydroquinone (CeHoOz)
10.4 g
sodium carbonate (Na2CO3)
10.4 g
potassium carbonate (KzCO:)
0.4 g potassium bromide (KBr)
Solution C (stable for several years)
10 g sodium hydroxide (NaOH) dissolved in 100 ml distilled water
c) Fixative for impregnation (stable for several years)
25 g sodium thiosulphate (NazSzO: . 5 HrO) dissolved in 1000 ml distilled water
IV. The ("wet") Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate method. The first wet ("wet" because cells are chemically fixed
before being treated with silver nitrate) method was described by CHATTON & LWOFF (1930, 1936). The
technique became well known after CORLISS (1953) published the version in use in the laboratory of FAURE-
FREMIET. It works well with many different kinds of ciliates, especially with hymenostomes (e.g.,
Tetrahymena, Paramecium, Cyclidium), prorodontids (e.g., Holophrya, Urotricha), most colpodids (e.g., Col-
poda, Bresslauides) and some hypotrichs (e.g., Euplotes). Less convincing results are usually obtained with pe-
ritrichs (e.g.,Vorticella),heterotrichs (e.g., Spirostomum, Metopus), oligotrichs (e.9., Halteria) and most hypo-
trichs (e.g., Oxytricha, Urostyla). The wet methods provide valuable information on the somatic and oral infra-
ciliature as well as the silverlines, which are, however, often rather faintly stained. The shape of the cells is usu-
ally well preserved, which is of advantage to the investigation but makes photographic documentation difficult.
As with the dry methods, only cortical structures are revealed. Several modifications have been described (see
FOISSNER 1991 for literature). ROBERTS & CAUSTON (1988) investigated the variables of this method in
detail.
Procedure (after CORLISS 1953 and personal experience)
Several slides should be prepared simultaneously from the same material. If only few specimens are ayailable,
these must be handled with micropipettes during steps l-1 (difficult task!); for ample material a centrifuge may
be used for steps l-3. Until dehydration (step 15 ), keep all solutions cold (about 5' C) as warming detaches the
gelatin layer from the slide. The method is not simple and requires experience. Since some steps most be done
very quickly it is necessary to be well organized.
1. If possible, concentrate ciliates by gentle centrifugation (the fixative is expensive) or collect individual speci-
mens and drop them into the fixative.
2. Drop ciliates into Champy's fluid and fix them for 1-30 minutes.
t6

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
Remarks: The ratio of material to fixative should be at least 1: l, better 1 :2. The fixation time apparently does
not influence the results greatly. We usually fix for about l0 minutes. Fixation should be carried out in a
fume hood since osmic acid fumes are highly toxic.
3. Remove fixative by centrifugation or micropipette and postfix in Da Fano's fluid for at least 5 minutes. Con-
tinue this replacement until the solution is the colour of Da Fano's fluid (2-3 times are usually sufficient).
Remarks: Material can be stored in Da Fano's fluid for years.
4. Place a very clean, grease-free slide on a hot-plate (35-45" C).
Remarks: The slides must be absolutely grease-free (clean with alcohol and flame); even commercial pre-
cleaned slides must be cleaned with an alcohol-moist cloth.
5. Place a small piece (about2-3 mm across) of gelatin in centre of the warmed slide and allow to melt.
Remarks: Gelatin should have been stored in the refrigerator for at least one week before use. Fresh gelatin
often causes cloudy silver precipitates.
6. Quickly add an equal-sized or smaller drop of concentrated specimens to the molten gelatin and remove slide
from hot-plate.
Remarks: Mix organisms thoroughly into the gelatin using a mounted needle.
l. Quickly remove excess fluid under the dissecting microscope with a warmed micropipette until ciliates re-
main just nicely embedded in a thin gelatinlayer.
Remarks: Steps 6 and 7 must be done quickly to avoid hardening and/or desiccation of the gelatin; if gelatin
solidifies during the procedure return the slide to the hot-plate for a few seconds. Excess fluid can be re-
moved only if ciliates are large. For small (<100 pm) species it is more convenient to spread the drop over
the slide until the gelatin layer has the appropriate thickness. If drop does not spread well the slide is not
grease-free. The gelatin layer must be very thin to allow the silver nitrate to pass through. Material should be
well concentrated. If too much Da Fano's fluid has been used or remains, precipitations develop or the gela-
tin may detach.
8. Immediately transfer slide to a cold, moist chamber (e.g., a covered petri dish with damp filter paper on the
bottom). Leave for about 5 minutes until gelatin has hardened.
Remarks: Gelatin must be hardened (check with the tip of mounted needle under dissecting microscope if in
doubt) but must not desiccate and/or freeze. Desiccated or frozen slides are of poor quality. Harden gelatin in
refrigerator or by placing the moist chamber on ice.
9. Flush slides in cold distilled water for 3-10 seconds
Remarks: This step is essential and determines the quality and intensity of the impregnation. If the gelatin is
washed too long, the impregnation may become too faint; if it is insufficiently washed coarse silver precipi-
tations cover the gelatin. It is recommended that at least 4 slides, washed 3, 5, 1 and l0 seconds,
respectively, be prepared.
10. Immediately transfer slides to cold silver nitrate solution for 30-60 minutes.
Remarks: Keep silver nitrate solution cold, as warming melts and .detaches the gelatin from the slide. 30 min-
ute impregnation usually suffices. Prolonged immersion intensifies impregnation only slightly and may
cause darkening of cytoplasmic inclusions. Gelatin layer becomes slightly milky in the silver nitrate solution.
A distinct milky coat indicates that too much Da Fano's fluid has been used and/or remained (step 9!).
I 1. Flush slides with cold distilled water for l-3 minutes.
12. Immediately transfer slides into a glass trough containing a 2-3 cm thick layer of cold distilled water. Place
glass trough on white paper and irradiate for 10-30 minutes using sunlight or an ultraviolet source
(<254nm) placed 10-30 cm above slides until gelatin tums golden brown.
Remarks: Tilt trough gently back and forth and change water after 2-3 minutes of irradiation to avoid silver
precipitations. Take care that water remains cold, especially when reduction is performed with sunlight. Un-
pretty clouds will develop in the gelatin, if temperature increases too much in this or any of the following
steps. Reduction with sunlight often produces clearer slides.
13. Check the intensity of impregnation after about l0 minutes of irradiation using a compound microscope.
Continue irradiation for another 10-20 minutes if impregnation is still too faint.
Remarks: The ciliary pattern should stand out dark brown against the light brown coloured gelatin and the
unstained cytoplasm. A rusty brown coloured gelatin indicates that too much Da Fano's fluid remained (step
e!).
14. Transfer slides to chilled 30 7o and then 70 7o alcohol (ethanol, not isopropanol!) for 10 minutes each.
t7

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
Remarks. If necessary continue irradiation.
5. Complete dehydration by two transfers at least 10 minutes long through 1007o alcohol (ethanol) at room
1
temperature.
Remarks: Gelatin hardens, the alcohol need not be chilled. Dehydrate thoroughly to avoid milky "water
spots" in the mounted slides.
16. Clear by two transfers of 10 minutes each through xylene.
Remarks: A prolonged stay in xylene (e.g.,2 days) sometimes produces extremely clear preparatigns. How-
ever, it may also + distinctly bleach the impregnation.
17. Mount in synthetic neutral mounting medium.
Remarks: Do not dry slides between steps 16 and l7r. Mounting medium should be rather viscous to avoid
air-bubbles being formed when solvent evaporates during drying. If air-bubbles develop in the mounted and
hardened slide, re-immerse in xylene for some days until the coverslip drops off. Remount using a more vis-
cous medium and remove possible sand grains protruding from the gelatin. Usually, some air-bubbles are
found immediately after mounting; these can be pushed to the edge of the coverslip with a finger or mounted
needle. The preparation is stable.
18. Check impregnation intensity about24 h after mounting the slides. If impregnation is too faint, it can be in-
tensified by 15 min UV-irradiation each during the following 2-5 days. Too long irradiation may cause
blacking oI specimens.
Reagents
a) Champy's fixative (prepare shortly before use; 9 ml of the fluid usually suffice for l-2 fixations; use fume
hood)
7 parts (3.5 ml) I 7o aeueous chromic acid (CrOr)
7 parts (3.5 ml) 3 7o aQueous potassium dichromate (KzCrzO;)
4 parts (2.0 ml) 2 7o aQtreous osmium tetroxide (OsO+)
b) Da Fano's fluid (stable for years)
900 ml distilled water (or sea-water, without additional NaCl, for marine ciliates)
10 g cobalt nitrate (Co(NOr)z . 6 HrO)
100 ml formalin (HCHO; commercial concentration, about 37 Vo)
10 g sodium chloride (NaCl)
c) Gelatin (may be used as long as not colonized by bacteria or fungi; fresh-molten gelatin must be clear and
yellowish in colour).
2 g powdered gelatin
0.005 g sodium chloride (NaCl)
20 ml distilled water
Mix these components and melt gelatin in a water bath, stirring frequently. Pour mixture into sterilized, small
flasks and store at least one week in refrigerator before use.
d) Silver nitrate solution (may be used for several preparations, that is, for about 40 slides if these are made on
the same day; used solutions which are older than 1 day may cause problems)
3 g silver nitrate (AgNO:) dissolved in 100 ml distilled water
The following materials must be prepared on the week/day preceding the preparation:
a) Salinated gelatin
b) Osmium tetroxide (takes about 10 hours to dissolve)
c) Chill a moist chamber, a glass trough (step l2), the silver nitrate solution, distilled water and alcohol (30 Vo,
7O Vo) in appropriate amounts.
V. The silver carbonate methods. Because of the large quantity of cells needed for the basic FERNÄNDEZ-
GALIANO (1976) technique, AUGUSTIN et al. (1984) proposed a modification which requires only few speci-
mens and may also yield permanent slides. Although the results are highly variable with all modifications, the
method is worthwhile because it works very quickly and often produces excellent impregnations, especially with
hymenostomes (e.g., --> Stokesia), holophryids (e.g., Holophrya, ) Urotricha), colpodids (e.g., -+ Bursaridium)
and heterotrichs (e.g., --> Stentor). Fixation is by formalin, which means that the shape of the cells is poorly pre-
served and even destroyed (cell bursts) in some species (e.g., most hypotrichs). The cells swell strongly during
18

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
the preparation process but become very soft and are thus easily flattened between the slide and the coverslip.
This makes photographic documentation easy but may result in interpretation errors. The silver carbonate meth-
ods reveal the infraciliature and certain cortical and cytoplasmic structures, especially the kinetodesmal fibres
and the nuclear apparatus. Several other modifications have been suggested (WILBERT 1983, WOLSKA 1966).
The silverlines in most cases do not stain.
Procedure (after AUGUSTIN et al. 1984)
l.
Place 1 droplet (about 0.05 ml) of a rich ciliate culture or even single specimens on a slide.
Remarks: Slide need not be grease-free. Its middle third should be delimited by lines drawn with a greasy
finger-tip or a wax crayon to prevent solutions from spreading over the whole slide.
2. Add l-2 drops of formalin (about 4 7o) and fix for l-3 minutes. Mix organisms with formalin by circular
motions of the slide.
Remarks: The duration of this step may greatly influence the results. Species with a firm cortex (or resting
cysts) usually need to be fixed longer (3 minutes or more) than those with a more fragile cortex (l minute or
less). Some species cannot be fixed well with formalin and cells may even burst. For these fixation with os-
mium tetroxide vapours (place inverted slide with ciliates for about I minute over a 4 % osmium tetroxide
solution in a fume hood) is sometimes useful. Fix as usual with formalin after osmium treatment.
3. Add l-3 drops of Femändez-Galiano's fluid to the fixed ciliates, without first washing out the formalin, and
mix by circular motions of the slide for 10-60 seconds.
Remarks: The amount of Fernändez-Galiano's fluid needed depends on many unpredictable factors (e.g.,
amount and concentration of fixative, size of drops, kind of species, composition of sample fluid). l-3 drops
usually work well. The same holds for the reaction time (10-60 seconds). The trial and error method must
frequently be used to obtain best results!
4. Place slide on a pre-heated (60-80" C) hot-plate and leave until the drop, which is now rather large, tums
golden brown (like cognac). This usually takes 24 minutes and the slide must be kept in constant circular
motion during this time. As soon as the drop appears cognac-coloured, check impregnation with the com-
pound microscope. Replace the slide on the hot-plate if impregnation is still too faint; if it is already too dark
repeat procedure, starting with step l, but vary amount of Femändez-Galiano's solution andlor impregnation
time etc.
Remarks: The correct impregnation time depends on many factors which are difficult to control (size of
drops, temperature, kind of species ...). The amount of pyridine and silver carbonate in the Fernändez-
Galiano fluid is especially important. Add some drops of pyridine andlor silver carbonate solution to the
Femändez-Galiano fluid if impregnation is repeatedly too faint, i.e. cannot be intensified by prolonged heat-
ing. Fix ciliates in 2-3 drops of formalin instead of 1-2 drops if impregnation is too faint. Ciliates from old
cultures, ion-rich fluids (e.g., sewage, soil) or anaerobic biotopes frequently impregnate poorly. For these
impregnation sometimes improves if they are washed prior to fixation (fluid from sample and distilled water
l:1).
5.
Interrupts impregnation by removing the slide from the hot-plate and by adding 1 drop of fixative (sodium
thiosulphate).
Remarks: The preparation is now ready. AUGUSTIN et al. (1984) describe a method for obtaining perrna-
nent slides. Their quality is, however, often not as good as with wet (fresh) preparations, which are thus usu-
ally preferred for investigation and photography. Pick out the well impregnated specimens with a micropi-
pette, place them on a clean slide and cover with a coverslip. For good micrographs the drop with the se-
lected specimens should be very small so that cells are strongly compressed between slide and coverslip. Ex-
cess fluid may be removed from the edge of the coverslip using a piece of filter paper. The impregnation
need not be fixed with sodium thiosulphate if the investigation is undertaken immediately. The impregnation
is stable for some hours when stored in a moist chamber. We recommend that the cells be compressed be-
tween the slide and coverslip immediately after the impregnation since silver precipitates may occur with
time in the reaction fluid.
Reagents
a) Fixative for organisms (stable for a long time)
0. lml formalin (HCHO; commercial concentration, aboü 37 Vo)
t9

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
ad 10 ml distilled water
b) Femändez-Galiano's fluid (prepare immediately before use; components can be stored and must be mixed in
the sequence indicated. The mixture must be slightly milky and can be used for some hours. Keep away from
sunlight. Make up a fresh fluid when no more impregnation can be achieved)
0.3 ml pyridine (CsHsN; commercial concentration)
24 ml Rio-Hortega ammoniacal silver carbonate solution
0.8 ml proteose-peptone solution
l6 ml distilled water
c) Fixative for impregnation (stable for several years)
2.5 g sodium thiosulphate (NazSzO:) dissolved in 100 ml distilled water
d) Rio-Hortega ammoniacal silver carbonate solution. Preparation (the ratios are important!): 50 mI of lO Vo
aqueous silver nitrate solution are placed in a flask; 150 ml of 5 7o aqueous sodium carbonate (NazCO:) are
added little by little under constant stirring; add 25 7o ammonia (NH:), drop by drop, until the precipitate dis-
solves, being careful not to add an excess; finally add distilled water up to a total volume of 750 ml. The solu-
tion is stable for several years.
e) Proteose-peptone solution (long term stability if not colonized by bacteria andlor fungi; discard dull solu-
tions)
96 mldistilled water
4 g proteose-peptone (bacteriological; sprinkle powder on the surface of the water and allow to dissolve
without stirring)
0.5 ml formalin (HCHO 37 7o; for preservation)
VI. Protargol methods. Protargol stains are indispensable for descriptive research on ciliates. Recently,, quanti-
tative protargol stains (QPS) are also widely used by protozoan ecologists (MONTAGNES & LYNN 1987,
1993, SKIBBE 1994). The QPS have a similar principle and quality as protocol A described below. Thus, they
can also be used for descriptive purposes.
Many protargol methods have been described, and none is perfect. Here, the variations which produce good re-
sults in our laboratory are communicated. These procedures work well with most ciliate and flagellate species
(some, however, only rarely impregnate well, e.g., Loxodes, Paramecium) but require at least 20 specimens.
Contrary to the silver carbonate method, a single specimen cannot usually be handled successfully. Depending on
the procedure used, protargol can reveal many cortical and internal structures, such as basal bodies, cilia, various
fibrillar systems, nuclear apparatus. The silverlines, however, never impregnate. The shape of the cells is usually
well preserved in permanent slides, which is an advantage for the investigation but makes photographic docu-
mentation more difficult. However, micrographs as clear as those taken from wet silver carbonate impregnations
can be obtained with protocol B if the cells are photographed prior to embedding in the albumen glycerol.
Protocol A (after FOISSNER 1991 and recent experience)
Most of our preparations are done using this procedure. The quality of the slides is usually adequate but fre-
quently not as good as with protocol B. The latter demands more material and experience; inexperienced workers
may easily lose all the material. As in all protargol methods, the procedure is rather time consuming and compli-
cated. Experiments with students showed that beginners have a fair chance of obtaining good slides. A centrifuge
may he used for step 2; staining jars (Fig.2.2e) are necessary for steps 6-16. The procedure is complicated and
subject to many factors. Thus, be well organized and study the "Remarks" carefully.
l. Fix organisms in Bouin's or Stieve's fluid for 10-30 minutes.
Remarks: The fixation time has little influence on the quality of the preparation within the limits given. Ratio
fixative: sample fluid should be at least 2:1. Pour ciliates into fixative using a wide-necked flask in order to
bring organisms in contact with the fixative as quickly as possible. Both fixatives work well but ma.fu provide
different results with certain organisms. Stieve's fluid may be supplemented with some drops of 2 7o os-
mium tetroxide for better fixation of very fragile ciliates, e.g., the hypotrich Urosoma. This increases the sta-
bility of the cells but usually reduces their impregnability.
2.
Concentrate by centrifugation and wash organisms 3-4 times in distilled water.
20

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
Remarks: There are now two choices: either to continue with step 3 or transfer the material through
30-50-70 7o alcohol into 70 7o alcohol (ethanol) where it remains stable for several years. Transfer pre-
served material back through the graded alcohol series into distilled water prior to continuing with the next
step. Impregnability of preserved material may be slightly different.
3. Clean 8 slides (or less if material is very scarce) per sample. The slides must be grease-free (clean with alco-
hol and flame).
Remarks: Insufficiently cleaned slides may cause the albumen to detach. Mark slides on back if several sam-
ples are prepared together. We use staining jars with 8 sections so that we can work with l6 slides simultane-
ously by putting them back to back (Fig.2.2e).
4. Put 1 drop each of albumen-glycerol and concentrated organisms in the centre of a slide. Mix drops with a
mounted needle and spread over the middle third.
Remarks: Use about equally sized drops of albumen-glycerol and suspended (in distilled water) organisms to
facilitate spreading. The size of the drops should be adjusted so that the middle third of the slide is covered
after spreading. Now remove sand, grains, etc. The thickness of the albumen layer should be equal to that of
the organisms. Some thicker and thinner slides should, however, also be prepared because the thickness of
the albumen layer may influence the quality of the preparation. Cells may dry out and/or shrink if the albu-
men layer is too thin; if it is too thick it may detach or the cells become impossible to study with the oil im-
mersion objective.
5. Allow slides to dry for at least 2 hours or for 12 hours (overnight) at room temperature.
Remarks: Slides may be allowed to dry for up to 24 hours but no longer if quality is to be maintained. Oven-
dried (2 hours at 60" C) slides are usually also ofpoorer quality.
6. Place slides in a staining jar (Fig. 2.2e) filled with 95 Vo alcohol (ethanol) for 20-30 minutes. Place a staining
#i:iJ'3iä::[:TäT#: ?il];ä:T;:lugr,
un arcohor series into concentrared arcohor as rhis causes
the albumen layer to detach! Decrease hardening time to 15-20 minutes if albumen is already rather old
and/or not very sticky.
7. Rehydrate slides throughlO 7o alcohol and two distilled water steps for 5 minutes each.
8. Place slides in 0.2 Vo potassium permanganate solution. Remove first slide (or pair of slides) after 60 seconds
and the others at 15 second intervals. Collect slides in a staining jar filled with distilled water.
Remarks: Bleaching is by permanganate and oxalic acid (step 9). The procedure described above is neces-
sary because each species has its optimum bleaching time. The sequence in which slides are treated should
be recorded as the immersion time in oxalic acid must be proportional to that in the permanganate solution.
The albumen layer containing the organisms should swell slightly in the permanganate solution and the sur-
face should become uneven. If it remains smooth, the albumen is too sticky and this could decrease the qual-
ity of the impregnation. If the albumen swells strongly, it is possibly too weak (old) and liable to detach. Use
fresh KMnO+ solution for each series.
9. Quickly transfer slides to 2.5 Vo oxalic acid. Remove first slide (or pair of slides) after 160 seconds, the oth-
ers at2O second intervals. Collect slides in a staining jar filled with distilled water.
Remarks: Same as for step 8! Albumen layer becomes smooth in oxalic acid.
10. Wash slides three times in distilled water for 3 minutes each.
1 1. Place slides in warm (60" C) protargol solution and impregnate for I 0-l 5 minutes at 60o C.
Remarks: Protargol solution can be used only once.
12. Remove staining jar with the slides from the oven and allow to cool for l0 minutes at room temperature.
Remarks: In the meantime organize six staining jars for developing the slides: distilled water - distilled wa-
ter * fixative (sodium thiosulphate) - distilled water - '70 Vo alcohol - 100 7o alcohol (ethanol).
13. Remove the first slide from the protargol solution and drop some developer on the albumen layer. Move
slide gently to spread developer evenly. As soon as the albumen turns yellowish, pour off the developer, dip
slide into the first two distilled water steps for about 2 seconds each and stop development by submerging
the slide in the fixative (sodium thiosulphate), where it can be left for 1*5 minutes.
Remarks: Now control impregnation with the compound microscope. The impregnation intensity is sufficient
if the infraciliature is just recognizable. The permanent slide will be too dark if the infraciliature is distinct at
this stage of the procedure! The intensity of the impregnation can be controlled by the concentration of the de-
veloper and the time of development. 5-10 seconds usually suffice for the diluted developer! Some species
2t

Investigation ofPlankton Ciliates and Species Concept
(e.g., most microthoracids) must be treated with undiluted developer. Development time increases with
bleaching time. Therefore commence developing with those slides which were in the bleaching solutions for
60 and 120 seconds, respectively. The thinner the albumen layer, the quicker the development.
14. Collect slides in the fixative (sodium thiosulphate) and transfer to distilled water for up to 5 minutes.
Remarks: Do not wash too long; the albumen layer is very fragile and detaches easily!
*
15. Transfer slides to 7O 7o - 100 7o 100 7o alcohol for 5 minutes each.
16. Clear by two l0 minute transfers through xylene.
17. Mount in synthetic neutral mounting medium.
Remarks: Same as for step 16 of the Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate method!
Reagents
a) Bouin's fluid (prepare immediately before use; components can be stored)
15 parts saturated, aqueous picric acid (CoH:N:Ozi preparation: add an excess of picric crystals to, e.g., I litre
of distilled water; shake solution several times within a week; some undissolved crystals should re-
main; filter before use)
5 parts formalin (HCHO; commercial concentration, about3T 7o)
part
1 glacial acetic acid (= concentrated acetic acid; CzH+Oz)
b) Stieve's fluid (slightly modified; prepare immediately before use; components can be stored)
38 ml saturated, aqueous mercuric chloride (dissolve 60 g HgClz in I litre of boiling distilled water)
l0 ml formalin (HCHO; commercial concentration, abottt3T 7o)
3 ml glacial acetic acid 1= concentrated acetic acid; CzH+Oz)
c) Albumen-glycerol (24 month stability)
15 ml egg albumen
15 ml concentrated (98-100 Vo) glycerol (C:HsO:)
Pre-treatment of the egg albumen and preparation of the albumen-glycerol: Separate the white carefully from
the yolk and embryo of three eggs (free range eggs are preferable to those from battery chickens, whose egg
white is less stable and sticky). Shake the white by hand (do not use a mixer!) for a minute in a narrow-
mouthed 250 ml Erlenmeyer flask until a stiff white foam is formed. Allow the flask to stand for about I min-
ute. Then pour the viscous rest of the egg white in a second Erlenmeyer flask and shake again until a stiff
foam is formed. Repeat until most of the egg white is either stiff or becomes watery; usually 4-6 Erlenmeyer
flasks of foam are obtained. Leave all flasks undisturbed for about l0 minutes and discard the watery albu-
men from the last flask. During this time a glycerol-like fluid percolates from the foam. This fluid is collected
and used. Add an equal volume of concentrated glycerol and a small thymol crystal (CroHr+O) for preserva-
tion to the mixture. Mix by shaking gently and pour mixture into a small flask. Leave undisturbed for two
weeks. A whitish slime settles at the bottom of the flask. Decant the clear portion, discard slime and thymol
crystal. A "good" albumen-glycerol drags a short thread when touched with a needle. The albumen is too thin
(not sticky enough) or too old if this thread is not formed. Fresh albumen which is too thin may be concen-
trated by leaving it open for some weeks so that water can evaporate. If the albumen is too sticky, which may
cause only one side of the organisms to impregnate well, it is diluted with distilled water or old, less sticky al-
bumen to the appropriate consistency. The preparation of the albumen-glycerol must be undertaken with great
care because much depends on its quality. Unfortunately, all commercial products which we have tried detach
during impregnation.
d) 0.2 Vo potassium perrnanganate solution (stable for about I day)
0.2 g potassium permanganate (KMnO+) are dissolved in 100 ml distilled water
e) 2.5 Vo oxalic acid solution (stable for about I day)
2.5 g oxalic acid (CzHzOt . 2 H2O) are dissolved in 100 ml distilled water
f) 0.4-0.8 Eo protargol solution (stable for about I day)
100 ml distilled water
ad 0.4-0.8 g protargol
Remarks: Use light-brown "protargol for microscopy" (e.g., Merck's "Albumosesilber für die Mikroskopie"
or "Proteinate d'Argent", Roques, Paris, France; but see Introduction to Methods, i.e. Merck's Albumosesil-
ber does not work at presentl). Some dark-brown, cheaper products do not work! Sprinkle powder on the sur-
22

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
face of the water and allow to dissolve without stirring; use a wide-mouthed bottle for solving the protargol.
Concentration of the protargol depends on its "strength", that is, on the company etc.
g) Developer (mix in sequence indicated; sodium sulphite must be dissolved before hydroquinone is added)
95 ml distilled water
5 g sodium sulphite (Na2SO3)
1 g hydroquinone (CoHoOz)
Remarks: This recipe yields the stock solution which is stable for some weeks and should be used undiluted
for certain ciliates (step 13). Usually, however, it must be diluted with tap water in a ratio of 1:20 to l:50 to
avoid too rapid development and one-sided impregnation of the organisms. Freshly prepared developer is
usually inadequate (the albumen turns greenish instead of brownish). The developer should thus be prepared
from equal parts of fresh and old (brown) stock solutions. Take great care with the developer as its quality
contributes highly to that of the slides. If the developer has lost its activity (which is not always indicated by a
brown colour!) the silver is not or only insufficiently reduced and the organisms stain too faintly. A fresh de-
veloper should therefore be prepared for each "impregnation week" and some old developer kept. Fresh de-
veloper can be artificially aged by adding some sodium carbonate (NarCO3). However, better results are ob-
tained with air-aged solutions, that is, by a developer which has been kept uncovered for some days in a
wide-mouthed bottle. It first turns yellowish, then light brown (most effective) and later dark brown and vis-
cous (at this stage the developer has lost most of its activity but is still suitable for artificial ageing of fresh
developer = 1: I mixture mentioned above).
During the past five years, we obtained very good slides with the low-speed developer used by Fryd-Versavel
(pers. comm.). It is composed of 7 g boric acid, 1.5 g hydroquinone, l0 g sodium sulphite, and 75 ml acetone,
all solved, one by one, in 420 ml distilled water. This developer is stable for some weeks and should be used
only once. Pour developer into a staining jar and immerse slides, one by one, controlling impregnation inten-
sity after 30-60 s. Usually, developing is finished within l-5 min (if not, double protargol conceritration be-
cause slides should not be too long in the developer, as the albumen may detach). The further procedure is as
described above (steps 14*11).
h) Fixative for impregnation (stable for several years)
25 g sodium thiosulphate (NazSzO: . 5 HrO) are dissolved in 1000 ml distilled water
Protocol B (after WILBERT 1915 and personal experience)
This modification produces excellent results but demands much experience. We manipulate large cells with mi-
cropipettes in a watch-glass (Fig. 2.2f1, whereas the centrifuge is used for steps 14,7 ,8 if cells are smaller than
about 150 pm. The watch-glass method is used when there are only a few specimens of larger cells; thus an at-
tempt is worthwhile even if only 20 cells are available. The organisms are very soft after development and are
thus easily compressed between slide and coverslip, which greatly facilitates photographic documentation.
1. Fix organisms as described in protargol protocol A (Foissner's modification).
2. Wash and, if so desired, preserve organisms as described in protargol protocol A (Foissner's modification).
Remarks: Wash cells either in the centrifuge (small species) or in a watch-glass (Fig. 2.2f). To change fluids
allow cells to settle on bottom of watch-glass and remove supernatant with a micropipette under the dissect-
ing microscope; concentrate cells in the centre of the watch-glass by gentle swirling.
3. Leave organisms in a small amount of distilled water and add, drop by drop, diluted sodium hypochlorite
(NaClO) and bleach for about l-3 minutes under the dissecting microscope (for small specimens, various
concentrations of NaCIO can be applied in centrifuge tubes, keeping the reaction time constant, e.g., I min-
ute).
Remarks: This is the critical step in this modification. If bleaching is too strong or too weak all is lost: cells
either dissolve or do not impregnate well. Systematic investigations showed that not the bleaching time but
the amount of active chloride in the sodium hypochlorite and the pre-treatment of the cells (fixation method,
fresh or preserved material) are decisive for the quality of the preparation. Different species need different
concentrations. Unfortunately, the concentration of active chloride in the commercial products varies
(10-13 7o) and is dependent on the age of the fluid. It is thus impossible to provide more than only a few
guidelines: 100 ml distilled water + 0.24.4 ml NaCIO (if product is fresh and cells were not stored in alco-
hol) or 100 ml distilled water + 0.5-1.6 ml NaCIO (if product is older and cells were stored in alcohol). The
transparency of the cells under the dissecting microscope may serve as a further indicator: fixed, unbleached
23

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
cells appear dark and opaque, whereas accurately bleached cells are almost colourless and rather transparent
(depends, however, also on size and thickness of the cells). Thus, increase the concentration of sodium hypo-
chlorite stepwise if cells appear too dark with the recommended concentrations. We routinely start with three
different hypochlorite concentrations if sufficient material is available.
4.
Wash organisms at least three times with distilled water and finally once in the protargol solution.
Remarks: Wash thoroughly, especially when fluids are changed with micropipettes, because even slightest
traces of sodium hypochlorite disturb the impregnation.
5. Transfer to I 7o protargol solution and impregnate for 10-20 minutes at 60o C.
Remarks:This and the next step should he carried out in a watch-glass even for material which is otherwise
manipulated with the centrifuge. The impregnation time depends on the kind of material and the degree of
bleaching. Check the progress of impregnation every 3-4 minutes under the compound microscope by pick-
ing out a few cells with the micropipette under the dissecting microscope; add these to 1 drop of developer.
Dilute developer andlor interrupt development by adding a little fixative (sodium thiosulphate) if impregna-
tion is strong enough.
6. Remove most of the protargol solution with a micropipette and add some drops of developer to the remain-
der containing the organisms.
Remarks:Fresh, undiluted developer is usually used (but see step 5). Control development in compound or
dissecting microscope. As soon as the infraciliature becomes faintly visible, development must be stopped by
adding a few drops of sodium thiosulphate. Judging the right moment is a question of experience; the perma-
nent slide will he too dark if the infraciliature is very distinct at this stage of the procedure! Generally: if
bleaching was correct, specimens cannot be over-impregnated.
l.
Stabilize the impregnation by two approximately 5 minute transfers through sodium thiosulphate.
Remarks: The developer need not be removed before fixation. For small species this and the next step can
be carried out in a centrifuge. Larger species most be manipulated with micropipettes because cells become
very fragile and would be damaged in a centrifuge. Cells are very soft at this stage and can thus be easily
compressed and photographed. Transfer some of the more darkly impregnated specimens with a very small
amount of the fixative onto a clean slide using a micropipette and cover with a coverslip. Organisms are usu-
ally flattened by the weight of the coverslip; excess fluid may be removed from the edge of the coverslip
with a piece of filter paper. Frequently, even better micrographs are obtained if specimens are flattened be-
fore fixed with sodium thiosulphate, that is, together with some developer.
8. Wash very thoroughly in distilled water (3 times with the centrifuge; l-lo times in watch-glass with micro-
pipettes). Finally remove as much of the water as possible.
Remarks: Even the slightest traces of the fixative destroy the impregnation within a few days or weeks.
9. Smear a moderately thick layer of albumen-glycerol on a clean slide with a finger. Drop impregnated,
washed cells on the albumized slide with a large-bore pipette (opening I mm) and dry preparation for at least
2 hours.
Remarks: The cells are too fragile to be spread with a needle. With much care it is possible to orientate cells
using a mounted eyelash. Commercial albumen-glycerol can be used.
10. Harden albumen by two 10 minute transfers through concentrated alcohol (ethanol).
Remarks: This and the next step are best carried out in staining jars. The albumen layer turns milky and
opaque.
l.
I Clear by two 5 minute transfers through xylene.
Remarks: The albumen layer turns transparent.
12. Mount in synthetic neutral mounting medium.
:
Remarks Same as for step 16 of the wet silver nitrate methodl
Reagents
Ifnot stated otherwise, the same reagents as in protargol protocol A are to be used.
Protocol C lor few specimens
Foissner learned this simple modification in Dr. P. Didier's laboratory (Clermont-Ferrand University). It some-
times produces excellent impregnations, especially with species having a firm cortex (e.g., microthoracids). It de-
mands little material because the specimens are mounted on the slide without washing.
24.

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
l. Collect specimens with a micropipette and place them at the centre of a grease-free slide. Remove excess
fluid as far as possible.
2. Fumigate cells with 4 Vo aeueous osmium tetroxide for about 2 minutes.
Remarks: Hold inverted slide close to the osmium tetroxide. Carry out procedure in a fume hood as osmic
acid lumes are highly toxic.
3. Add an equal sized drop of albumen-glycerol, mix thoroughly but gently with a mounted needle and spread
mixture in a moderately thin layer over the middle third of the slide.
Remarks: Albumen-glycerol must be prepared as described in protargol protocol A. Cells are very fiagile and
frequently break or dissolve.
4. Allow to dry for about 2 hours.
5. Proceed with steps 6 (coagulation of albumen in concentrated alcohol) to 17 of protargol protocol A. Bleach-
ing times are usually about 50 7o shorter than with Foissner's modification.
Preparation for Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM)
Ciliate species cannot usually be identified solely by scanning electron microscopy because only a limited num-
ber of characters is revealed. However, SEM is useful for the beginner by allowing a three-dimensional view of
the specimen and for the specialist in documenting details which are difficult to reveal with other methods. Only
the method used by ourselves is described here. See textbooks for general SEM-techniques.
Procedure
1. Pour ciliates into Parducz' fixative and leave for about 30 minutes.
Remarks: Concentrate and clean material as thoroughly as possible (see step 2). Ratio of sample: fixative
should be at least 1:1, better 1:2. Add some drops of 5 n HCI if fixative becomes milky when the riraterial is
added. Parducz' fluid preserves most ciliates very well. However, the cirri of the hypotrichous ciliates usu-
ally disintegrate into their component cilia. Hypotrichs should thus be fixed either in concentrated sublimate
(dissolve 60 g HgCl, in I litre hot distilled water and allow to cool) or in a mixture composed of 4 parts con-
centrated sublimate and 1 part 2 7o osmitm tetroxide. A much better fixative for hypotrichs is that used by
Barry Wicklow (pers. comm.): mix equal amounts of 2 7o aqueous osmium tetroxide and 3 7o glutaraldehyde
and fix cells for l5-30 min. Wash in distilled water and proceed as described below (steps 2-10). Unfortu-
nately, such material cannot be stored because crystals are formed. Thus, critical point drying must be fol-
lowed immediately. The fixative preserves also many other ciliates well, although the metachronal ciliary
waves are frequently not as distinct as with Parducz' fluid. We use this fixative now routinely for hypotrichs.
2. Wash ciliates at least 5 times with 0.05 M Na-cacodylate buffer.
Remarks: Ciliates in the buffer may be refrigerated for years. Washing must be done in a watch-glass (Fig.
2.2f7 and a micropipette should be used to remove bacteria and organic debris. This cleaning of the material
is essential but rather difficult and laborious, especially with small species (< 100 pm) and field material;
thus cultures and/or pre-cleaned material (see below) should be used. The cleaning is performed as follows:
Ciliates settle at the bottom of the fixation tube after 30 minutes (cp. step 1). Remove as much supernatant as
possible with a pipette (do not centrifuge!). Then transfer the material to a watch-glass and allow to settle for
about 5 minutes (use fume hood). Quickly remove most of the fixative with a micropipette under the dissect-
ing microscope. Now wash the ciliates with the buffer by several passages through a large-bore (diameter
about I mm) pipette. Bacteria and debris adhering to the ciliates are hereby mechanically removed. Again al-
low to settle, but control sedimentation with the dissecting microscope; remove supernatant containing bac-
teria and debris with a micropipette as soon as ciliates settle. This procedure must be repeated until the mate-
rial is clean and all of the debris is removed. Use fractionated sedimentation if the sample contains several
species differing in size andlor mass.
Field material: Larger species (> 100 pm) are picked out with a micropipette and sprinkled into the fixative.
Several hundred specimens most be collected because loss of material may be considerable during the fol-
lowing steps. Small species can be prepared by this method only if abundant material is available. Accumu-
lation can often be achieved by the following simple method: leave a freshly collected sample containing
ample mud to stand for some hours at room temperature. Due to oxygen depletion the ciliates usually move
to the surface where they can be skimmed off with a teaspoon.
25

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
3. Transfer cleaned ciliates with a small drop of buffer to 16mm
the preparation chamber (Fig. 2.3).
Remarks: Place the drop on the bottom plankton net of
the chamber which is weighted with washer 1. The net
must be dry to avoid spreading of the drop to the cham-
ber margin and the washer. Place the top plankton net
carefully on the drop, that is, on washer 1, using forceps.
Weight top net with washer 2, close chamber with lid
and immediately transfer into 30 7o ethanol. The plank- 5
ton net must have a mesh-size < 12 Vm and can be used l+
several times. It should fit exactly into the chamber,
which is best achieved using an appropriate punch. Alter- 1
natively, metal grids with 10-20 pm mesh size,, as used
by soil scientists, can be used. They are stable for years.
1. Dehydrate chamber with ciliates in ethanol series
(30-50-10-90-100-100 7o) for 5 minutes each.
5. Dry chamber with ciliates in a critical-point drying ap- 5
paratu s. N6§
NI
Remarks: We use COz and change the alcohol at least T -
l0 times. Amylacetate, as used previously (FOISSNER E
E 2
1991), proved to be superfluous. (.o
tffix***y*x1x**"ffi 3
6.
Open chamber and place ciliates on the SEM-stub. Use 4
7g
a mounted eyelash if ciliates do not fall from the net.
Remat'ks.' The dried ciliates usually form a lump at the I
Fig. 2.3. Brass chamber for critical-point drying of protists (af-
bottom plankton net. This lump is carefully transferred
ter P. SIMONSBERGER, unpubl.). 1 = threaded chamber lid,
(by holding the net over the stub and stripping off the 2 = washer2,3 = washer 1,4 = threaded chamber jacket,5 -
ciliates with the eyelash) to the SEM-stub, where it is holes for forceps tips, used to screw lid into jacket, 6 = top
dispersed under the dissecting microscope with a plankton net,J - sample, B = bottom plankton net.
mounted eyelash. The ciliates spread easily if cleaning
and drying were sufficient.
Preparation of the SEM-stub: We use commercial aluminium SEM-stubs. To get a black, homogenous back-
ground the stub is covered with a very thin layer of Mixtion ä Dorer Clarifide (Lefranc and Bourgeois, Le
Mans) 2-6 hours before use. This fluid is used by artists to attach goldfoil and is available in ordinary stores. It
dries slowly (whereby its surface becomes smooth) and attaches the ciliates to the slide. The mixture may be di-
luted with turpentine. Note that small species sink into the lacquer more easily than larger ones and the mixture
should thus be allowed a longer drying time (6 hours).
7.
Harden the lacquer for at least 12 hours at room temperature.
Remarks: This drying is not essential but prevents the development of cracks when the preparation is placed in
the vacuum of the scanning electron microscope.
8. Sputter with gold. This is a very critical step! Use low (4 mA) sputter energy. Sputter about 10 times for 15 s
each, with breaks of about 5 minutes to avoid heating. Cilia become curled and denaturated if sputter en-
ergy is too high!
Reagents
a) Parducz' fixative (prepare immediately before use)
4 ml aqueous 2 7o osmium tetroxide (OsO+)
1 ml saturated, aqueous mercuric chloride (HgClz; preparation see protargol protocol A)
b) 0.05 M Na-cacodylate buffer (can be stored for several months in the refrigerator; adjust to pH 7 with HCI)
I 0.7 g dimethylarsinacid-sodium salt (CzHoAsNaO z . 3 HzO) are dissolved in 1 000 ml distilled water
26

Investigation of Plankton Ciliates and Species Concept
2.3
Species Concept
The species concept, of course, influences the number of species found and/or recognized as "undescribed". We
usually apply the morphospecies concept which is, according to FINLAY et al. (1996a), as valid as any, and
probably more pragmatic than any other. We do not consider ourselves as splitters, that is, we classify new spe-
cies as such only when populations can be separated from their nearest relatives by at least one distinct (non-
morphometric) morphological character.
As an adaptation to the pelagic life, rather many ciliates host green algae, mostly Chlorella (e.g. CHRISTO-
PHER & PATTERSON 1983, FINLAY er al. 1988, REISSER 1986; Tables 3.8, 3.10). It is widely assumed thar
such green populations are conspecific with apochlorotic strains. Certainly, green individuals often resemble
apochlorotic congeners when superficially analyzed. However, closer examination often reveals more or less dis-
tinct morphological differences which are increasingly considered to be of significance at species level. Several
examples are mentioned in our book, e.g. -+ Halteria grandinella and -+ Pelagohalteria viridis (differing even
at genus level) as well as -s Coleps hirtus hirtus and -+ Coleps spetai (differing in the structure of the armour
plates).
The integration of a symbiotic partner requires specific physiological and behavioural mechanisms (see REIS-
SER 1986 for review; TAKEDA et al. 1998) which can be considered, independently of morphological differ-
ences, as species characters. The zoochlorellae in Paramecium bursayia, for instance, release distasteful metabo-
lites which repel a predator, -+ Didinium nasutum (BERGER 1980). Usually, it is not possibly to infect apochlo-
rotic strains with algae (SCHULZE 1951, TARTAR 1961, REISSER 1986). Certainly, the strength of associa-
tion between algae and host varies, and in some cases it might be weak and not associated with distinct morpho-
logical features. Examples are now known, viz. -s Coleps hirtus viridis, -+ Teuthophrys trisulca, and -+ Stokesia
vernalis. Considering the different physiological properties of chlorotic and apochlorotic strains and subspecies,
ecologists should separate them or at least note whether the population is chlorotic or apochlorotic, irrespective
of the taxonomic status of the population.
27



3
GE,NERAL E,COLOGY
It is beyond the scope of this book to provide a comprehensive general ecology of plankton ciliates, as was writ-
ten by FENCHEL (1987) and LAYBOURN-PARRY (1992). More recent compilations may be found in a spe-
cial volume of "Marine Microbial Food Webs" edited by H. ARNDT (1994a) and the very new textbook by SO-
ROKIN (1999). Here we review mainly data related to community structure and diversity which are not detailed
in the books mentioned.
3.1
Introduction
The pelagial (water column) is colonized by a diverse group of organisms collectively termed plankton. These
organisms are adapted morphologically and physiologically to live in the open waters of lakes, rivers, estuaries
and oceans (LAYBOURN-PARRY 1992). Eqlanktonic ciliates as such are known since the tum of the century
(e.g., LAUTERBORN 1894, ZACHARIAS 1897), and some of the species treated in our book were discovered
already by LINNAEUS (1758, 1167),MIÜLLER (1773) and EHRENBERG (1S3S). Later, FAURE-r'RBUET
(1924), GAJEWSKAJA (1933) and KAHL (1930-35) studied the ciliate plankton in more detail, although most
species described by FAURE-FREMIET (1924) were from marine habitats. Recently, mainly FOISSNER &
WILBERT (1919), KRAINER & FOISSNER (1990), KRAINER (1995), WILBERT (1986a), and some Russian
workers (e.g., ALEKPEROV 1984d, MIRABDULLAEV 1985) contributed significantly to the taxonomy of
freshwater plankton ciliates. Contemporary morphological studies on marine plankton ciliates were performed
(1995).
mainly by LYNN et al. (1991), MARTIN & MONTAGNES (1993), andPETZ et al.
,
Pelagic ciliates and protozoa in general have been ignored for a long time by plankton ecologists, although studies
from the sixties and eighties showed that they form an integral part of the planktonic food web and contribute sig-
nificantly to the total zooplankton'standing crop (e.g., BEAVER & CRISMAN 1989b, GATES 1984,
NAUWERCK 1963, PACE 1986, PORTER er al. 1985, SOROKIN & PAVELJEYA 1972).Ir was rhe concepr of
the microbial loop, developed by AZAM et al. (1983), which stimulated more detailed and intensive research.
Now, ecology of plankton protists has attained a high standard in terms of methods an{ interpretation. If, however,
one looks at the identification of the organisms involved, the standard is often poorer than it was 50 years ago,
which may strongly limit the usefulness of the data. For example, SIl,mf et at. (1996) calculated a cell volume of
only 3050 pm3 for the bulky, 4V65 x 18-35 pm-sized -+ Coleps spetai. According to our calculations, it has a
volume of about 60 000 pm3. This large difference indicates an identification and/or calculation error by §IirABf
et al. (1996), making the corresponding grazing rates useless. Particularly frustrating are the many recent papers
on "community structure", where most of the species comprising the communities are determined to family or ge-
nus level only. We doubt that such papers are longJived and sometimes they may be even misleading. For exam-
ple, CARRICK & FAHNENSTIEL (1990) found 35 ciliate taxa in the surface plankton of Lakes Huron and
Michigan; however, only three of them were identified to species level and the percent biomass composition over
a one-year period was confined to supra-familial level. Furthermore, the low total number of "species" indicates
that two thirds of them were overlooked. WIACKOWSKI et al. (1994a) studied the effects of metazoan plankters
on ciliate community structure. However, none of the ciliates was identified to species level. JAMES et al. (1995)
compared seasonal and vertical changes in the community structure of planktonic protozoans in two southem
hemisphere temperate lakes of contrasting trophy, and they examined the hypothesis that southern lake microzoo-
plankton has a simple community structure and low protozoan abundance and biomass relative to northem temper-
ate lakes. However, none of the taxa was identified to species level. Thus, their conclusions that the protozoan
communities of the two lakes differ from each other and also differ from northem temperate lakes are entirely un-
substantiated.
3.2
Adaptations
All the common morphological adaptations to the pelagic life (SOMMER 1994), which reduce sinking rate, can
be found in plankton ciliates:
' small size (for example, -s Balanion planctonicum, -+ Mesodinium spp.):
29

General Ecology
' shape (inverted conical in -+ Paradileptus elephantinus; parachute-like in + Liliimorpha viridis; body elon-
gation[s], for example, in -+ Teuthophrys trisulca; distinct excavations, for example, -+ Histiobalantium bo-
damicum and -+ Bursaridium pseudobursaria);
' spines (-+ Hastatella radians), tentacles (-s Actinobolina spp., -s Belonophrya pelagica, -+ Suctoria), and
bristles (for example, -+ Halteria, -+ Pelagohalteria, -+ Askenasia, -+ Mesodinium, -+ Spiretella);
' foamy cytoplasm (for example, -+ Bursellopsis spp.);
' mucous covers (-+ Mucophrya pelagica, -+ Ophrydium spp.);
' large locomotor organelles combined with feeding apparatus at top of body (--> oligotrichs and -+ peritrichs);
' special movement (for example, strong metachronal waves in -+ Urotricha spp.; fast and/or jumping, for ex-
ample, -+ Halteria, -+ Askenasia, -+ Didinium, -s Monodinium, ) oligotrichs);
' gas production in algae-bearing species (not yet proved, but likely influences buoyancy);
' transport by other plankton organisms (for example, -s Pseudohaplocaulus infravacuolatus and P. anabae-
nae on Anabaena, -+ Epistylis pygmaeum on rotifers and crustaceans, + Gajewskajophrya melosirae on dia-
toms;Fig.3.l)
There are only a few species, for example, -+ Obertrumia aurea and -+ Frontonia leucas, which hardly have any
adaptation to the pelagic life. However, O. aureafeeds primarily on pelagic cyanobacteria, which produce gas
vesicles (CANTER et al. 1992, SOMMER 1994) possibly providing also some buoyancy for Obert'umia, or the
dispersed filaments act as some sort of net.
+
The tintinnids with their characteristic lorica, possibly a def-ence against predators, are the major ciliate com-
ponent of the marine pelagial. CORLISS (1979) considered the species number to be nearly 1200, ta figure
greater than that comprising any other suborder or order in the ciliates. Surprisingly, only about seven species
live in freshwater, strongly indicating that loricae composed of agglutinated material (mainly sand grains and
diatoms) are not of great adaptive value in limnetic habitats. Possibly the lower density and thus the reduced
buoyancy of freshwater against seawater (1.028 kgl-t at4" C and 35Voosalinity;' SCHWOERBEL 1980) is, at
least partially, responsible for the low species number of limnetic tintinnids. Furthermore, no other eupelagic cili-
ates have a lorica, although it is present in some of their benthic relatives (for example, hypotrichs, peritrichs).
The contribution of loricae to buoyancy and predator defence is not yet clear (PIERCE 1995, RECK 1988, TO-
SHTKAZU & TANTGUCHT 1995).
A high percentage (23 7o) of the euplanktonic ciliate species is mixotrophic, that is, combines phagotrophy (het-
erotrophy) and phototrophy (Tables 3 .7 , 3 .10). These species either sequester plastids from their prey (that is, the
association is temporary and the functional plastids have to be renewed continuously) or have a permanent asso-
ciation with endosymbionts (mostly Chlorella), which replicate inside the host and are passed on to the succeed-
ing generation during binary fission (for reviews, see DOLAN 1992, JONES 1994, RIEMANN et al. 1995,
STOECKER 1998). Mixotrophic ciliates with symbiotic algae are common in freshwater ponds and lakes, but
rare in the sea. They are often associated with the pycnocline or micro-oxic layers. In the ultra-oligotrophic
Crooked Lake, Antarctica, mixotrophic ciliates accounted for as much as 90 7o of ciliate numbers (LAYBOURN-
PARRY et al. 1992).In a temperate, mesotrophic lake, algae-bearing ciliates seasonally comprised <l*51 Vo of
the ciliate numbers and <1-13 7o of the ciliate biomass (PACE & ORCUTT l98l). In subtropical, oligotrophic
lakes, mixotrophic ciliates may comprise 21-59 7o of the ciliate biomass and 3-20 7o of the total photosynthetic
biomass (BEAVER et al. 1988). HECKY & KLING (1981) observed that the biomass of Strombidium cf . vir"ide
nearly equalled or even exceeded the phytoplankton biomass during much of the stably stratified period in Lake
Tanganyika.
BERNINGER et al. (1986) studied the spatial distribution of five zoochlorellae-bearing ciliate species in a pro-
)
ductive freshwater pond. In the stratified water column, Stokesia vernalis remained close to the water surface,
while all other species reached peak abundance close to the oxic-anoxic boundary. With the collapse of stratifica-
tion, Euplotes and Frontonia re:ltrrred to the sediment where they reverted to a heterotrophic nutrition although
they retained some zoochlorellae. Acaryophrya and -+ Disematostoma buetschlii also became heterotrophic, but
they remained evenly distributed in the water column and lost their zoochlorellae. Stokesia disappeared, presum-
ably because it encysted.
30

General Ecology
Fig. 3.1. Epiplanktonic ciliates (from MAMAEVA 1979). a<: Shape (l; 50 pm), stalk branching (2), and copepod host of --> Eplslylis anas-
tatica. dz Vaginicola crystallina (100 pm) attached to a filamentous algae. e: Vorticella campanula (70 pm), a common benthic species, was
recorded several times from the pelagial (Table 3.6), likely attached to floating substrates. frg: Pseudohaplocaulus anabaenae (60 pm) at-
tached to the cyanobacterium Anabaena. hz Vorticella sphaerica (30 pm) attached to Melosira. i, j: Vorticella conochili (33 pm) attached to
a colony of the rotifer Co nochilus unicornis.
3l

General Ecology
Mixotrophy is an important adaptation to planktonic life. It allows ciliates, and protozoa in general, to cope suc-
cessfully with the feast and famine existence which frequently prevails in the pelagic habitat. When the energy
requirement of the growing cell cannot be met by the ingestion of the dispersed food particles alone, translocated
photosynthate derived from plastids or endosymbiont allows continued growth and division of the cell, or, at the
very least, survival (LAYBOURN-PARRY 1992).
Other specific physiological adaptations are at present not known but might exist. Little research has been under-
taken in this direction. The fast population changes of certain species reported in the literature could indicate that
a considerable portion of the euplanktonic species is more r- than k-selected, that is, have short generation times
and small body sizes (for example, --> Balanion planctonit'um; trlÜLLBR 1991). Most species seem to be eury-
thermic.
3.3
Abundance, Biomass, Productivity
Ciliates, and protists in general, contribute considerably (sometimes more than 50 7o) to standing crop, grazing.
nutrient regeneration, and secondary productivity of pelagic organism communities (e.g., GAEDKE 1993,
MATHES & ARNDT 1995, MAYER et al. 1991, PACE, & ORCUTT
1.0 198 1, SANDERS et al. 1989, SOROKIN & PAVELJEVA l9l2; Fig.
cnrstaceans
0.8 3.2). WEISSE & VÜf-f-ER (1998) concluded from a detailed study of
the plankton protozoa of Lake Constance that they are even more im-
0.6 portant than metazoa as bacterivores, and both are of comparable sig-
o.4 rotifers nificance as herbivores. Abundances, biomasses, and productivity of
pelagic ciliates are highly different in various lakes and can change
o,2 ciliates very rapidly. Representative examples are shown in Figures 3.3-3.5
and Tables 3.1-3.5. For data on certain species, see ecology section of
0.0
A M A S o species descriptions.
Fig. 3.2. Seasonal pattenr ol'the rclative inrpor-
tance of tl-re metabolic activity of diflbrent STRAILE (1991) reviewed the literature on gross growth efficiency
groups of herbivores. From GAEDKE ( 1993). data (GGE; fraction of prey carbon consumed converted to predator
carbon) and found that nano/microflagellates, dinoflagellates, ciliates,
rotifers, cladocerans, and copepods have mean and median GGE of about 20-30 7o. Contrary to the common
practice of using different values of GGE for ciliates and crustaceans, he suggests that GGE hardly differs be-
tween taxa.
Table 3.1: Summary of data on annual abundances of planktonic ciliates in lakes Macrozooplankton generally reduces cili-
of different trophy. From BEAVER & CRISMAN (l9B9b). ate plankton densities significantly (e.g.,
GILBERT 1989, ME,RRELL & STOE-
Trophic state Rar"rge of observed Chlorophylla(-g-t)
abundances (ind. I I) values associated with CKER 1998, PORTER et al. 1979, STOE-
trophic state CKtrR 8L CAPUZZO 1990, WIACKOW-
U ltraoligotrophic 2400 <l SKI et al. 1991a). However, HAVENS &
BEAVER (1997) observed a lack of top
Oligotrophic 2300-1 0800 1-5
down control in Lake Okeechobee (Flori-
Mesotroph ic l 8000-70900 5-10 da, USA), and found that nutrient addi-
E,utrophic 55500-145100 1 0-56 tions did not affect ciliate densities. Usu-
ally, however, both species number and
Hypereutrophic 90000-2 I 5000 >56
abundance of ciliates increase with increa-
sing trophy (Table 3.1).
32

General Ecology
Table 3.2: Literature values of abundances and biomasses of pelagic ciliates (DW = dry weight, WW = wet weight). From CARRIAS et al.
(1994) and JAMES et al. (1995).
Abundance (ind. 1-') Biomass Lake Trophic state Latitude
0- 1 0300 2.1-15.6 mg DW m 2 Char Ultraoligotrophrc Arctic
200-2600 0.25-2.20 frg C 1-r Taupo orgotroph C Temperate
4500 13.3 pg DW l-r Quebec lakes Oligotrophic Temperate
7000 + 3500 45.4 t24.1 pg WW I I Huron and Michigan Oligotrophic Temperate
8800 13.8 pg C 1 Tanganyika Oligotrophic Tropical
9000- I 9000 52-83 pg WW I I Jack Lake Oligotrophic Temperate
10800 t 5400 9.3+5.6pgClr Floridian lakes Oligotrophic Subtropical
23500 62.0 pg WW I I Ontario lakes Oligotrophic Temperate
61 00 6.0pgCl1 Pavin Oligo-mesotrophic Temperate
4800 6.0pgCl Vassiviöre Mesotrophic Temperate
6800 94 pm3 lr Constance ( I 981) Mesotrophic Temperate
1 2000 130 trrm3 I I Constance ( 1988) Mesotrophic Temperate
t 600 25.1 pg DW I I Quebec lakes Mesotrophic Temperate
1 00- 1 0000 Erken Mesotrophic Temperate
21 500 + t] 00 25.1 t 11.4pgCll Floridian lakes Mesotrophic Subtropical
5600-84000 120-l ll0 mg C m r Kinneret Meso-eutrophic Subtropical
1 00- l 89000 1.51-1260 p-t l-' Oglethorpe Meso*eutrophic Temperate
l 2800 r 9300 68.6 t 48.1 pg WW I I Ontario Eutrophic Temperate
55500 r 7600 26.0+5.9p9C1' Floridian lakes Eutrophic Subtropical
177 00 50.0 prg DW 1r Quebec lakes Eutrophic Temperate
up to 9200 Esthwaite Eutrophic Temperate
300- I 0400 t.r-250 ps C l' Okaro Eutrophic Temperate
0-230000 Dalnee E,utrophic Temperate
t26000 + 89200 155.0+60.9pgCl' Floridian lakes Hypereutrophic Subtropical
Table 3.3: Average biomass, production, and Table 3.4: Comparison of heterotrophic (nanoflagellates [Hnano] and ciliates) and
turnover rate of phyto- and zooplankton in phototrophic (nanoflagellates [Pnano] and microflagellates [Pmicro]) protozoan pro-
Lake Constance for 1981_1991. From WÖLFL duction with epilimnetic (5 m) bacterial and primary production in Lake Michigan.
( 1 ee6). From CARRICK et al. (1992).
Group Biomass Productivity P/B Carbon Protozoan Protozoan production Bacterial primary pro- Ratio
(mgCm2) (g C m-'a-') (a') pool group (pgCl'd') duction(pgCl'd')
Phyto- 1200 t t46 221 x ll.2 191 Hetero Hnano 2.68 25.12 0. 10
plankton
Bacteria 603 t 101 2l .3 ! 3.3 46 Ciliates 1.83 0.30
HNF' ll x19 13.5 t 3.5 fl6 Total 0.40
Ciliates 339 x54 24.0 + 4.4 70 Photo Pnano 3.s8 25.04 0.r4
Rotifera t01 x 49 4.9 ! 2.0 46 Pmicro 2.55 0. 10
herb. 'k l}t4 t 185 19.7 + 2.2 25 Total 0.24
Crustacea
carn. * 550 t 140 t3.l r 2.0 t9
Crustacea
* herbivorous Crustacea - Daphnia + Bosmina + Eudiaptomus. Carnivorous Crusta-
r !
Total 3950 185 329.5 9 B3 cea = Cyclops + Mesocyclops + Leptodora + Bythotrephes
J-, J-,

General Ecology
Table 3.5: Energy budget of organic matter in Mozhaiskoye Reservoir during June-October 1984 (in 0-7 m layer, Kcal m-2 y-r). B = mean
biomassforJune-Octobel,p=production,R=respiration,[=production+respiration(assimilatedenergyforgrowth),C=foodconsump-
tion, Kz = P/4. From BELOVA (1994).
B P P/B R A C Kz
Phytoplankton 13.6 4052 55.1 l0r3 5065 0.80
Bacterioplankton 6.1 901 t34.5 t946 284l 0.32
Zooplankton: ciliates 2.1 148 10.5 188 336 4lB 0.44
grazing 8.9 164 18.4 268 432 720 0.38
predacious 1.6 1B I 1.3 6l 85 106 0.21
1400
1200
1 000
800
600
400
200
0
1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 19BB 1989 1990 3.3
E protozoa ü Rotirera INauptll I naacrozooplankton
ln
at)
I=
00
a
D
D M A M o N 3.4
m Metazooplankton
L W Protozooplankton
(Y) H Phytoplankton
t-r
FF-
L-l
o
E Fig. 3.3" Changes in the average abundance (ind. I r)
6IJ of pelagic ciliates in the Danube River (river km
1669) in spring, summer and autumn, l98 1 to 1990.
o 2
From BERECZKY (1998).
ifr
Fig. 3.4. Percentages of protozoans, rotifers, nauplii,
.-O o and macrozooplankton in total community biomass
11\ 100 of Lake Oglethorpe (USA) for monthly samples, De-
e- cember 1918 to December 1919. From PACE &
o
ORCUTT (1981).
P
J 50
e- Fig. 3.5. Comparison of seasonal changes of bio-
o
ä volume and composition of the zooplankton compo-
o nents (stacked bars) with the phytoplankton bio-
o o JJAS JFM volume in Lake Neumühler (Germany), February
N
1990 to March 1991. From MATHES & ARNDT
1 990 1991 3.5 ( 1 ees).
34

General Ecology
()
15 25
(r) o
E 20 o
go) 10 fb
15 (U
Lo
Gl? c 10 o E-
o 5 o
0 0
E
t40
200 §l
u, E
30 150
(I) a
.g a
20 100
'6 ()
u o, 10 50 (f)o
0 0
Fig.3.6. Population dynamics of freely motile specimens and cysts of -+ Pelagostrombidiumfallax in Lake Constance during 1997 (from
MÜLLER & WÜNSCH 1998). Top: chlorophyll a concentration (mean values in 0-20 m; solid line) and water temperature in 3 m (dotted
line). Bottom: Cell counts of motile specimens, integrated over the 0*20 m depth interval (dotted line) and flux rates of cysts, averaged over
periods of sediment trap exposure, mostly 3,4 or'l days (solid line).
3.4
Cysts and Parasites
l
Resting cysts of pelagic ciliates are largely unknown; those known, we included in the individual species descrip-
tions. Recent findings, reviewed by MÜLLER (1999), indicate that resting cysts may play an important role in
the seasonal cycle of some plankton ciliates. In Lake Windermere, England, LAYBOURN-PARRY & ROGER-
SON (1993) recorded blooms of -+ Tintinnidiumfluviatile from March through May and in August and Septem-
ber. During the intervening period Tintinnidium sank in the water column and remained as a layer of largely en-
cysted individuals, which were, however, not described morphologically. In the prealpine Lake Constance, Ger-
many, MÜLLER & WÜNSCH (1998) studied the population dynamics of -s Limnostrombidium viride and -s
Pelagostrombidium fallax over one
seasonal cycle; resting cysts were
collected by sediment traps. Motile
stages and cysts of L. viride were
restricted to April/May, with a
maximum flux rate of 2 x 104 cysts
r.
m-2 d Pelagostrombidium fallax,
a dominant throughout the growing
season, encysted in March to June
and September to November, with
the higtrest flux rates (up to 2 x 105
cysts m, d ') recorded during
phases of decline of the motile
population (Fig. 3.6).
ffi ffi ffi
The role of parasites in regulating
plankton protozoan communities is
unknown. We observed a heavy in- ffin@
fection of + Pseudostrombidium e t g
planctonticum by a suctor, which
very likely reduced its abundance. Fig.3.7. Sphaerophrya stokesii in vivo, an ectoparrasitic suctor of -+ Stol;csiu t'ct'ttulis
Likewise, heavy infections of Eu- (from MAMAEVA l9l9). a, b: Specimens with retracted and extended tentacles (about
29-35 pm across without tentacles). c, d: Infected Stokesia specimens. e-h: Cell division.
35

General Ecology
tintinnus pectinis by the lethal dinoflagellate Duboscquella chachoni reduced abundance in Chesapeake Bay,
USA (COATS & HEISLER 1989). And MAMAEVA (1979) described a new suctorian, which parasitized ->
Stokesia vernalis (Fig. 3.7).
3.5
Communities
There was no comprehensive review available on ciliate species recorded from freshwater plankton. Thus, we
screened hundreds of papers for an overview (Table 3.6). Detailed species lists from certain lakes were provided
only by some Russian workers (e.g., BELOVA 1994), but rarely have determinations been done by a combina-
tion of live observation and silver impregnation. In most species lists, especially from recent times, many taxa
were identified to genus level only.
Table 3.6: Ciliates recorded from the pelagial of freshwater and saline inland lakes, ponds, reservoirs, and running watersl. When comparing
your data with this list, which is not complete, consider that many species were transferred to other genera. We indicated this only for the
more common species. Obvious misspellings were corrected. Many species, combinations, and synonyms can be found via the index at the
end of the book. Thus, use also the index to find your species name!
m2
I axa References3'4'5 Ciliate Atlas6
o Ac:aryophrya collari s 5B
Acaryophrya helenae 1
Acaryophrya mamillata J l, 86,200,220*
Acineta compressa 2ll *
Ac'ineta L'uspidata 21 4'k (now M etac:ineta) rv/488
Ac:ineta elegans 82, 83, 84,202
Acineta.flava 277 d'= rY l4s0
Ac'ineta grandis 14* , 37* ,, 93,183, 203* , 215* , 2ll* ,, 2lB rv 1448
Ac'ineta linguifera 22 (now Discophrya)
Acineta robusta 82
Acineta simplex 205
Ac'ineta trunc'ata 160
Acineta tuberosa 128,202,215* rY 1442
Ac r op i s t hiunt ntutab i I e 60,222
o Actinobolina radians deta led data, see page t2 rY 1243
o Actinobolina smalli deta led data, see page 15
o Actinoholina vorax deta led data, see page 18 tY 1246
o Actinobolina w e nrichii deta led data, see page 23
Actinobolzs spp. -+ Actinobolina
Amphileptus anser t6l
Amp hil e p t us c' lap ar e di i B, 12* , 13*, 60, 126, l4l,ZlJ* IY I2B4
Amphileptus meleagris 3, 13*
Amphi I e ptus pl e uros i gma 13*, 126, 134, 216,219 rY 1290
Amphileptus procerus 211* tY 1297
o Askenasia ac'rostomia deta led data, see page l48
o Askenasia c hlorelli gera deta led data, see page 15 1
Askenasia faurei --> C y c lotr i c hium faur e i
Askenasia stellaris+ 112,221
o Askenasia t,olvox detailed data, see page 154 IY I25L
Aspidisca cicada 2, l2*, 13*,29,39*,6[, B5*,9'.3,95,98*, 104, 108, 109, 135*, 138, 156* rl3t 0
167 ,215* ,216, 219,220*
Aspidisc'a costata -+ Aspidisca cic'ada
Aspidisc'a lync'eus 13* ,22,80, 90, 95, 109, 134, 135*, 191, 197 ,2lJ'k ,220* rl3t7
A s p idi s c' a mar s up ia I i s 229*
Aspidisr:a sulcata 123
Aspidisca turrita 135* II383
36

General Ecology
m2
t axa References3'4'5 Ciliate Atlas6
As ty I o z o o n amp ho r ifo r me 1l
o Astylozoon enriquesi deta led data, see page 455
o Astylozoon fallax deta led data, see page 453 IU2B9
o Astylozoon faurei deta led data, see page 455 rrl29 |
o Astylozoon pyrforme 134,219
o Baikalaster pelagicus 222
o Balanion planctonicum detailed data, see page 363 rrrl369
B alanonema sapropelica 229*
Balanophrya mamillata -+ Acary ophrya mamillata
Balanophrya pernix 7l
o B alantidion pe llucidium detailed data, see page 252
Balladina elongata 22
Balladina fusiformis 220*
Balladina parvula 76
Balladina similis 220*
o Belonophrya pelagica detailed data, see page 124
Bizonula parva 12*, 735*, 229*
Blepharisma elongatum 61,80
B I e p har i s ma late r iti um 13* rrl384
Blepharisma musculus t6l
Blepharisma steini 39*
Bothrostoma undulans ) 73, r35* rrl40t
Botticula rinqueleti 160
Brac'honella spiralis I 24, 193, 201 rrl40t
o Bursaria truncatella 8, 13*, 23,50*,61,90, 110, 132, 135*, 14J,166, 171,lJJ,, l99,ZlJ*,218, r1424
230
o B ursaridium p s eudobur saria detai ed data, see page 709 r1423
o Bursellopsis nigricans mobilis deta ed data, see page 387
o Bursellopsis nigricans nigricans detai ed data, see page 383
o Bursellopsis pelagica detaied data, see page 375
o Bursellopsis spumosa detaied data, see page 372 rrrl405
o B urse llop sis trunc'atct detaied data, see page 391
C ae nomorpha c'orlissi ) 56, l3
Caenomorpha lata ) 56, l3
C ae nomorpha levanderi ) 160
Caenomorpha medusula ) 22,24, 63, 64, J3,7 4, 1 16, I 23, 126, 150, 1J3, 186, 189,201 rrl424
C ae nomorpha saprope lica ) 160, 173 rrl424
C ae nomorpha unis erialis ) 63,13,758,20J rrl424
C alyptotric ha c hlor elli g era BO
C alyptotric ha lanuginosa 58, t26 III/2BB
Campanella umhellaria 49 , 69 , 123, 2ll * rrl225
C ar c' he s ium lac' hmanni B, 10 (likely a synonym of Carchesium polypinum)
Carchesium limneticum -+ E picarche sium p ectinatum
C ar c' he s i unt p e c' t i n at unt -+ E p icarc' he s ium p e ctinatum rrlt 49
Carchesium polypinunt 2*, 13*,22, 42, 48,50*, 85*, 93,99, 124*, 135*, 155*, 166, 112 lJB, lJg, rrlt3l
9l , 205 , 214* , 215* , ZlJ *
Carchesium spectabile 35*, l3l , 138,205 (likely a synonym of Carchesium polypinum)
C ardi o s t o mat e ll a v e rmifo rme + 60
Chaenea lintnicola 201
Chaenea teres+ 23, 98'F ,20J ,220* (very likely C . str'ictct) N lts2 (c.
stricta)
C ha s mat o s t o ma r e niJ'o r me 22
C hilodon dentatus -+ C hilodonella dentata
Chilodonella capucina l2* l3*,135*
C hi I o do ne I la c uc ullul us -+ T r it hi g mo st onta c uc ul lulus

Ecology
m2
I axa References3'4'5 Ciliate Atlas6
Chilodonella dentata 2, 3L*, 90, 215* ,219 (synonym with C . uncinata)
C hi I o do ne I I a Jl uv iar i li s 90
Chilodonella steini -> Trithi gmostoma steini
Chilodonella uncinata 5, 12*, 13*,14*,30*, 39*,50*,51*,61, B5*,90,9Jr,, gB*, 109, I13,133, u4s
134, 135*, 160, 193, 195, 214*, zlJ*, 219, 220*
C hilodo ntop s i s be n gale ns is 216
C hilodo ntop sis dep r e s s a 13'r', 80, 220* IITI424
C hilodontop sis e longata 160
Chilodontopsis vorax 229*
C i ne t o c hilum m ar g ar itac e unt 12*, l3*, lJ, 18, 22, 30*, 39*,55*, 90, 97*, 98*, 104, 105, 109, 126, 135,k IITI249
163, 164, 167 , 19l, 195,219,220*,229*
C I at hr at o s t o nta 0v un't -+ D is emato stoma huetschlii
C I imac o s to mum e m ar g i nat um 7, l0
Climacostontum virens 22, 123,212* , 220* rrl394
o Codonella cratera detailed data, see page 617 I/183
o Codonella cratera reticulata 184
C o hn i I e ntb u s .fus ifo r mi s -+ Kahlilembus attenuatus
C ohnilemhus pusillus -+ P se udoc' ohnilembus pusillus
Cohnilembus verminus+ 222
Coleps amphacanthus 20,22, l3B
Coleps hicuspis 24
o Coleps elongatus deta led data, see page 292
: Coleps hirtus hirtus detailed data, see page 273 IIU382
Coleps hirtus lacustris I 38, 1 13,229*
Coleps hirtus minor 134, 13 B, I 50, 219 , 220*
o Coleps hirtus viridis detailed data, see page 284
Coleps inc'urvus 55* 160
o Coleps nolandi detailed data, see page 297 IITI395
Coleps octospinus t23
o Coleps spetai detailed data, see page 2BB TII/4OO
Coleps striatus r3B
Coleps tric'hotus 160
Coleps uncinatus 1,2
Coleps viridis -+ Coleps hirtus viridis
Colpidium campylunt -+ Dexiostoma campylum
Colpidium colpoda 2, 13*,14*,22,50*,85*, 8J,92,98*, 103, 110, 124*,134, 135*, 138, 190, TITI43
215*,21J*,229*
Colpoda aspera 9B* (mainly soil)
Colpoda c'ucullus 2, 13*, 22, 87, 88, 89, 92, 134, 135*, l38, 151, 152, 153, 160, 215*,, 216, r1403
2t9
Colpoda inflata 134, 146,214* (mainly soil) r1399
Colpoda maupasi 90 (mainly soil)
Colpoda reniforr4is 219
Colpoda steinii detailed data, see page 714 r1390
Condylostoma caudatum 60,222
Condylostoma kasymovi 209
Condylostoma magnum 226§
Condylostoma tardum 172
C o ndy I o stoma v o rtic' e lla -+ Linostomella vortic e lla
C othurnia annulata 50*, 160,219 rrl25 |
Cothurnia crystallina 14* ,22,203*
Cothurnia imherbis l4*,206
Cothurnia inc'isa 49
C othurnia lobata 49
Cothurnia nodctsct 14*.215'k

General Ecology
m I 2 axa Referenaart'o'' Ciliate Atlas6
Cothurniopsis vag0 14*, I 10, 154
C oxlie lla ( Cyttarocylis ) helix+ 222
o Coxliella helix minima 60
Cristigera minuta 219
Cristigera phoenix 80, 1 60
Cristigera setosa 220*
o Crohylura pelagicct 2
C ry pt o c hi I um ni gr i c' ans -; Uronema nigricans
C t e do c te ma ac ant ho c ry p tum 126,219 rrl294
Cyclidium hrandoni t72
Cyclidium centrale 58
Cyclidium citrullus+ 10, 12'F,l3*, 18,43,90, 104, 109, 123,138, 160, 1J2,20J,214'k,219,229* III
(likely confused with ) C. glauc'orua)
C y c' I i di um d i I e c ati s s imunt 56, l3
Cyclidium elongatum 109,126,220*
C y c I i di um .t'l a g e I I at um 58, 201
Cyclidium glaucoma 5, 7, 10, 12*, 13*, 16, lJ, 18, 23, 5l*, 54, 55*, 58, 72, 90, 97'k, l0B, 109, III/3OO
123, 126, 135*, I 38, I 6J ,, 791, 795,276, 219,220*
C y c lid ium he pta tric hunt 90 IIII3II
Cyclidium musc'icola t23
C yclidium oli gotric hum 220*
Cyclidium porcatum 5J,J3,J4
Cyclidium setiger 5tt
Cyclidium versatile 6l ,219
C y c I o g ranlma I at e r itia 219 (now Naxella lateritia)
o C yclotrichium brunneum 60,7J,138,222 (contained in main k"y)
o Cy c' lotric hium .faur e i lB, 193
Cyclotrichiunt gigas+ 90,125*
o C yclotrichium humilis 60,222 (contained in main key)
o C yc lotric hium inflatunr 208
C y c I ot r i c hi um I imne tic um 138, 196,219,221 (see -+ Cyclotrichium viride and -» Pelagovasic:ola c'inc'-
tum)
o Cy c: I ott'ic: hium p e c tinat um 1t
C y c lotri c h ium sphae ric um+ 134, l3B
o C y c' I otri c hium v ir id e detailed data, see page 205
C y r t o I op ho s i s muc i c' o la detailed data, see page 718 rl4t4
Dexiostoma campylum 6, 12* , 13*, 90, 98*, 124*, 135*, 20J ,214* ,zlJ* ,229* IITI33
D exiotric' ha ce ntralis -+ D exiotrichides ce ntralis
D exiotric ha c olpidiop s is 5B
D e xi otri c' ha gr a nul o s a 4, 5,6, 58, J3, J 4,80, 98'k , 723, 126, 193 ITII24O
Deriotrichia plagia -+ D exiotrichia granulosa
D exiotric hide s c entralis 160 rrrl266
Dichilum platessoides 52
o D idinium chlorelli gerunt detailed data, see page 167
o Didinium minimunl 7 | (a Monodinium)
o Didinium nasutum detailed data, see page 17 1 TY I22B
Didinium spp. see also Monodinium spp.
Dileptus anser 8,9, 12*,18,34,50*, 53,61, B5'F,BJ, BB,89,92, ll2, l2l,131, 132, 134, IV/198
147 , 151, I 52, 153, 1J2, 176,215*,217*
Dileptus binuc:leatus 2t9
Dileptus bivacuolatus 220*
Dileptus c'ygnus 2t9
Dileptus falciformis 55*
))
Dileptus gigas t61
Dileptus jonesi 150
39

Ecology
m2
I axa References3'4'5 Ciliate Atlas6
D i I e p tus mar gar it iJ'e r rv/185
Dileptus monilatus -+ M onilicaryon ntonilatus
Dileptus moniliger r r0
Dileptus spiralis ll
D il e ptus tr ac he lio ide s -+ P elagodileptus trachelioide s
D i nop hry a li ebe rkue hni i + Acropisthium mutabile
Diophrys scutum+ 8
D ip I e ur o s ty I a ac uminata 22
D isc' omorp ha pe ctinata ) I 35* (now Discomorphella pectinata) IU45I
o D i s e mato stoma bue t s c hlii deta led data, see page 409 III/ 1 80
o D isematostoma tetraedricum deta led data, see page 414 III/185
Drepanomonas exigua 2t9
Dysteria fluviatilis 22 rlt2s
Dysteria marina+ 2t9
Dysteria navicula+ l2*
Dysteria proraefrons+ 160
E I I obi o p hry a do nac' i s + 160
E nc he ly diunt c I e p s i nifo rme 213
E nchelyodon armatus 8,9
E nc' he ly o do n mo ni I atus 112
Enc he ly omorp ha v e rmicular'is ) l3*, 135*, 229* rY 1456
Enchelys arcuata 22
Enchelys gasterosteus 115 rY/l5B
Enchelys microstoma r3B
Enchelys pupa r33, 134
Enchelys simplex 12*, 13*, 135*, 138,214*,219,229*
Enchelys vermicularis -+ Enc he ly omorpha v ermicularis
Epalxella exigua ) 160
Epalxella mirabilis I 123,160 rrl440
E,palxella oligotricha ) 56, l3
Epalxella spinosa ) 56,73
Epalxella striata ) 63 rrl440
o Epicarc he sium p e c'tinatum deta led data, see page 508 rrlt49
o E pistylis anastatic'a detailed data, see page 515
Epistylis halatonica 160
Ep isty li s branc hiop hila 7J 4, 2t5*
o Epistylis daphniae 1 80*
o Epistylis digitalis detailed data, see page 523 III2T2
Epistylis elegans 229*
Epistylis fluitans 52,90
E,pistylis galea 214* rrlt96
E,pistylis invaginata 13*
Epistylis irregularis 198
Epistylis lacustris -+ E pistylis anastatica
E,pistylis nutans -+ Opercularia nutans
Epistylis nympharunt 22 rrl211
Episrylis plic'arilis 12*, l3*, 1 4*,, 22, 60, 61, J6, B5*, 95, 124*, 135*, lJz, I BB, 194, 202, 203* rrl205
214*, 215*, 2ll*, 2lB, 220*, 222, 229*
o Epistylis procumbens detailed data, see page 527 trl22t
o Epistylis pygmaeun'L detailed data, see page 535
E,pisrylis pyriforruis 124*
Epistylis rotans -+ Epistylis procumbens
Epistylis umhellaria -+ C ampane lla umbe llaria
Epistylis urceolata l68 (now Epistylis entzii) rrlt90
Epistylis variabilis 1 49§

Ecology
m I 2 axa References3'4'5 Ciliate Atlas6
o Epistylis zschoklcei 12*, 13r" 92, 135* ,214t'
E,uplotes aediculatus 100 rl3s2
Euplotes ffinis 12*, 13*, 61, 86, 90, 135*, 217l" r1340
Euplotes halteatus+ B*
Euplotes carinatus 13*,135*
Euplotes charon+ 22, 110, 135*, 166,201, 215*
Euplotes daidaleos 38,58, 59,J4,213
Euplotes eurystomus 9,90,229* rl3s7
Euplotes grac'ilis+ B
Euplotes harpa+ B, 134
Euplotes harpa haikalensis 60
Euplotes moebiusi 229* r1341
Euplotes muscicola I 35*
E uplotes nov e mcarinatus t72
Euplotes patella B, 9, 12*,13*,22,29,50*, 86, 90,92, 135*, 138, 161,201 ,221*,276,21J* r1362
E,uplotes patella planktonicus 229*
E,up I o t e s tr i s ul c atus + 90
o Fabrea salinct 149§ ,221§
ttl
Foissneria viridis
F olliculina boltoni 160
Frontonia ac'uminata J ,8, 13*,22,90, 109, 125*, 126, 132, 134, 135* , 150, 16l m/l5s
Frontonia angusta 4, 134,20J III/160
Frontonia arenaria+ t34
Frontonia atra 12*, 13*, 104, 132, 134, 135*, 193,214*,219 IIII164
Frontonia depressa 12*, 13*, 135*, 220*
Frontonia leucas detailed data, see page 416 IITI169
Frontonia marina+ t34
Frontonia nigric'ans 134
Frontonia roquei 86,220*
Frontonia tternalis 38, 58, 7 4,, 96, 213
Furgasonia ruhens 6t
Furgasonia viridis 118
c G aj ew s kaj op hr'y a me los irae detailed data, see page 725
Gastrostyla mystacea B u2t0
Gastrostyla ste inii 22, 166 11212
Gerda glans 22
Glaucoma frontata 98*
Glaucoma macrostoma 2
Glaucoma myriophylli 229* (now Epenardia myriophylli) III/106
Glaucoma pyriformis -+ Tetrahymena pyriformis complex
Glaucoma scintillans 2, 72*, 13*, 30*, 90, 98*, 124i", 135*, 160, 167, 795, 207, 214*, 219, 229* ilr192
Glaucoma setosa -+ Tetrahymena setosa
G I o s s at e I la b ue t s c' hl ii I 55*
))
G I o s sat e I la t i ntinnabulum 54
o Halteria bifurc:ata detailed data, see page 554
o Halteria grandinella detailed data, see page 559 rlt3l
Halteria oblonga 229*
Halteria volvox -+ Askenasia volvox
o H aplocaulus pe lagicus 9,60,103, 138, 196,222
o H astate lla ae sc'ulacantha 134, 160, 172
o Hastatella radians detailed data, see page 460 ru29s
o H eliocometes conspicuus 60,222
Hemiophrys aselli t93
H emiophrys J'usidens -+ Litonotus fusidens
Hemiophrys pt"ocera -+ Antp hile ptus pt'o c erus

Ecology
m I 2 axa References3 4 5 Ciliate Atlas6
Hentiophrys punc'tata 160 (now Amphileptus punctatus) rv/303
o H i stiohalanti unt bodami c' unt detailed data, see page 424
H i s t io h a lant ium natans 5, 90
H i s t i o ha I anti unt v ir idi s 5B
H i s t r i c' ul us c' o mp la natus 90
Histt'it'ulus hisrrio 22,86
Histriculus similis+ 2ll * (likely Sterkiella histriomuscorum)
Holophrya alveolata -+ P elagothrix alveolata
Holophrya atra -+ Holophrya disc'olor
H o I op hr"y a b i c' o r" o nata 56,73
Holophrya disc'olor J,8,9, 10, 11, l2't" 13* ,22,58, 61, 109, 126, 132, 134, 135'k, 138, 160, 166, IIII32B
ll2, lJ 3 , 192, 214* , 219
Holophrya grac'ilis I 86 (now Apsiktrata gracilis) III/3 1 B
o Holophrya haplostoma t34
Holophrya hexatricha J, B, 9, 10, 23, l3B, 2lB, 221, 229*
H o lop hr"ya I i e h e r kue hni i t61
H olophrya ovunl 2, 7, B, 22, 95, 199, 2lB, 219, 222 IIII322
o Holophrya perluc'ida 60
Holophrya saginata 60,222
ITolopht'ya teres 7, l2*, l3*,22,61,123, 124*, 125*, 134, 135*, l3B,2l4*, 215*,218,219 IIII336
Holophrya simplex J ,8, 10, 1 l, l2t" l3'r' , lJ , 18,23, 123, 125*, 133 , 134, 135r' , \J6,214x" 216,
2lB, 219 , 221
Holostic'ha kessleri+ t26 U22B
Holostic'ha monilata B, 123 t'lz3t
Holosticha mystac'ect --> G a s tr o s ty la nty stac e a
Holosticha pullaster t26 r1240
H omal oz oon v e r mi c ular e 22,90, 150 rY l2r9
o H y p otr i c hidiunt c' o nic um detailed data,, see page 677 rl2t8
I s o c y c' I idium g I o b o s um 56
Jankowskia conJ'unis 210,221 (hkely synonym wth Askenasia sp.)
Jankowskia mobilis 210,221 (llkely synonym with Askenasia sp.)
K ahl i I e mb us ait e n uatus 220* IIII231
Kerona pedic'ulus 90 u26s
Keronopsis monilatct -+ H o losticha nto nilctta
Keronopsis musc:lrLtm I 35*
Keronopsis rubra+ --> P seudokeronopsis rubra
Lac rymaria c lav arioide s 208
Lacrymaria caudata+ r0
Lacrymaria elegans -+ Lagynus elegans
Lac'rymaria lagenula 60, 134
Lacrymaria olor B, 9, 12*, 14*,22,92, | 10, l2l, 126, 135*, l3B,2l5*,279 rY lt63
Lac'rymaria minima 2t9
Lac'ryntaria pupulct 132, 134, 138,219
Lac' ry mar i a s ap r o p e I i c a 56,63,J3,J4, 135ä'-
Lac ry mar ia v e r m i c: ular i s 219 (now Phialina vermicularis)
o Laga nophrys vaginicola 95 rrl256
o Lagy nophrya ac'uminata detailed data, see page 258 IV/178
La gy n o p hry a m anti I lata -+ Ac' a ry op hrya mantillata
Lctgynophrya ovalis 220*
o Lagynophrya rostrata 5 8, 90, 193 , 219
Lagynophrya simplex 134, 219,220*
Lagynus elegans ) 22, 56, 63, 13, 726, 138, 160 rY 1fl3
Lemhadion hullinun't J , B, 10, 22, 23, 126 ilrl2t2
o Lembadion conchoides 52,60
Lembadion lucens 6, J, B, 9, 23, 90, 103, 1 04, 169, l9l, 196, 229'k IIII205

Ecology
Taxaz Referenaart'o't Ciliate Atlas6
Lembadion magnum 6, 58,74,90, I 45, 150, l88, 213, 219, 222, 224, 229* TIII2I9
Lembus elongatus 60 (a synonym of Cohnilembus verntinus)
Lembus pusillus -+ P se udocohnilembus pus ill us
Lembus saprophilus 98*
o Lepidotrac he lophyllum lineare detailed data, see page 262
Le pr otint i nn us p e ll uc id us + 134, l46,2lB
Le uc op hry s .fl uv iat i li s 60 (now Tetrahymena)
Leucophrys patula 138 (now T etra hyme na patula)
o Liliimorpha viridis detailed data, see page 164
o Limnostrombidium p c lagicum detailed data, see page 574
o Liruno str omhidiunt viride detailed data, see page 577 u 146
o Linostonte lla v ortic'e I la detailed data, see page 655 tu390
Lionotus anas )) 38 (a synonym of Litonotus cygnzs; KAHL l93l)
o Lionotus gandolfii 2
Litonotus anguilla 220*
Litonotus c'arinatus zlJ'k
Litonotus q)gnus 12*, l3*, 18, 30*, 3l*, 50*, 5l*, 58,92,98*, 108, 1 19, 126,132, 135*, l3J, IV/3 1B
138, 1 48,214* , 216,2lJ* ,219,229*
Litonotus .fasciola -+ Litonotus cygnus
Litonotus .f'usidens l93,zlJ*,220* rY 1326
Litonotus grandis 215* (likely a Loxophyllum; KAHL 193 1)
Litonotus lantella 2, 12*, 13*, 29, 92, 135*, 160, 1J3, 195, 214'k, 229* tY 1329
Litonotus nanus 220*
Litonotus pleurosigma -+ Amphileptus pleurosigma
Litonotus vesiculosus 160
Lo hmanni e I I a ov ifo rm i s + 219
LongiJr"agma ohliqua 86, I 60,220*,221,222
o Longitricha.flava 60,222
o Longitric ha puytorac' i detailed data, see page 368
Loxocephalus lucidus l5l , 186, 189 (likely a synonym of -+ Dexiotricha granulosa)
Loxocephalus luridus 5,l5l ,186 TIII245
Lorodes ntagnus I 19, 24, 25, 62, 65, 66, 6J, 68,J4, 114, 149§, 150, 193, 213 IY I31B
Loxodes rostrum ) 134, 167, ll3, 193 rY 1318
Loxodes striatus I 4, 19,25,63,65,66,6J,68,74, l14, 134,, 150, 160, 187,193,201 ,213 rY l3t8
Loxophyllum .fasciola 22 (possibly a synonym of -+ Litonotus Jasciola)
Loxophyllum helus 8,90, 135* tY 1364
Lorophyllum meleagris J,98*, 160, 202,229x rY l3s4
Loxo p hy I lu nt s e ti g e r um + 160
Ludio parvulus I 201
o Maritu.ja caudata 222
o Marituja pelagic:a detailed data, see page 43 I IIII195
Maryna rotunda 2tB
o Membranic'ola tamari detailed data, see page 626
o Meseres c:ordiformis 60, 25*, 133, 134, l3J, l3B, 222
o Mesodinium acarus detailed data, see page 135 rY 1257
o M esodinium fimbriatunt 228
o Mesodinium pulex detailed data, see page 139 rY 1260
M esodinium rubrum+ -+ Myrionecta rubra
M etacineta mystacina 14*,203* ,215* IY I4BI
Metacystis crassa+ 90
M e tacy s ti s dap hni c' o I a r60
Metacystis erigua 112
Metacystis truncata+ 219
o M etastrombidiunt ni grunt llJ,ll9, 122
Metopus ac'idiferus ) 160

General Ecology
m I 2 axa References3'4'5 Ciliate Atlas6
Metopus c'urvatus ) r60
Metopus daphnides ) 73
Metopus es ) 22, 24, 63 , 98* , 126, 150, I 60, 201 rrl400
Metopus J'uscus ) 160, 113,189 rrl400
Metopus hyalinus ) 160, 172
Metopus laminarius ) J3, 126, 160
)
M etopus minimus 123
Metopus pulcher tot'tus ) 112
Metopus rostratus ) 160
Metopus setifer I 160
Metopus spinosus I 160 trl40t
Metopus spiralis ) -+ Brachonella spiralis rrl40r
Metopus striatus ) 73, r60 rrl40t
Microthorax pusillus 22.60,61, I15,222 IITI4] B
M onilicaryon monilatus 10, s0 rY lt99
o M onodinium alveolatum detailed data, see page 178
o Monodinium balbianii balhianii detailed data, see page I 82 rY l23s
o M onodinium balhianii brevipr"ohos detailed data, see page 190
cis
o Monodinium balhianii rostratunt deta ed data, see page 196
o M onodi n i um c hl o r e lli g e run't deta ed data, see page 198
o Monodinium perrieri deta ed data, see page 202
o Mucophrya pelagic:a deta ed data, see page 723
M y c t e r ot hr ir tuanto tue ns i s 60, 222 (bryophilous and terrestrial)
Myrionecta rubra+ t42§,143§, 144§,225§
Nassula amhigua 46,216
Nassula aurea -+ Obertrumia aurea
Nassula carpathica t34
Nassula citrea 10
Nassula elegans -+ Nassulopsis elegans
lt'lassula exigua 219
Nassula magna 134, 160
Nassula ornatcr 73* , 22,23,28,33,9J*, 725* , 134, 73J , 738, 155*, 166, 1J2,219,234 IIII436
Nassula pic'ta 6l rru445
Nassula tuntida 55'k,207
Nassulopsis elegctns 22, 46, BJ ,90, 1 1 0, 1 53, 1 60, 215* IITI43O
Nassulopsis vorax -+ Zosterodasys transversa
o Obertrumia aurea detailed data, see page 700 IITI45I
O nyc hodr omop s i s flexili s 220*
Onychodrlmus grandis 22,98*
Opercularia allensi 2ll*
Opercularia coarctata 50*, 135*,21J* IIlI68
O p e r c ul ar i a mi c' r o d i s c un't 2n*
Opercular"ia nutans 12* , 13*, 46* ,, 49, 135* rrln 6
Opercularia phryganea 217 *
Ophrydium crassicaule t20 rrl242
Ophrydium eichhorni 28
Ophrydium eutrophicum detailed data, see page 540 LU239
o Ophrydium naumanni detailed data, see page 55 1
Ophrydium versatile detailed data, see page 543 LU232
Ophryoglena atra 13*,22,28,60,J1,135*
Ophryoglena flava 90, 219
Ophryoglena flavicans J,8,22, ll0
Ophryogle na incluieta 150
Ophryoglena maligna 2t9

GeneralEcology
m2
I axa References3'4'5 Citiate Atlas6
o Ophryoglena pelagica 60, ll ,222
Ophryoglena tigrina 90
O p hry o g le na utr ic ulariae 207 ,219
Ophryoglena yorax 90
o O pisthone cta bivacuolata 6l
o O pisthonecta henne guyi detailed data, see page 467 rrl299
O p isthotr ic ha c r as s i stilata -+ O xytricha cras sistilata
O xytr ic ha c hlor e I li g e r a 115 11217
O xy tri c ha c r as s is tilata 220*
Oxytricha euglenivora B6
Oxytricha J'allax 13*, 61,110, 135*,216 rlzt9
Oxytricha ferruginea 22,86 II2B3
Oxytricha ludibunda 220*
Oxytricha minor l3l, 138
Orytricha ovalis 2t9
Oxytricha pellionella + Tach)) soma pellione llum
Oxytricha saprobia 13*, 135*, 214*,229* r1292
Oxytricha setigera 13* 11294
Paracineta moebiusi 55*
o P aradileptus elephantinus detailed data,, see page 221 rY 1203
P ar ame c ium aur e I ia complex J,8, 12*,22,85*, 87,110, 134, l3B, 156*,160, 166, ll6,2l2*,216,211* ITIII29
229*
Paramecium bursaria 2, 8, 12*, l3*, 22,23, 39*, 53,, 61, 85*, 87, BB, Bg, 90, 92, 93, 1 10, 123, 132, ITTII4O
134,, 135*, 152, 153, 156*, 158, 167, 766, 176, 181,214*,215*,216,21J*,
229*
Paramecium calkinsi t76
Paramecium caudatum J,8, 12*,13*, 22,28,45,46,50*, 5l*, 85*, 87, 88, 89, 90, 92,93,9J* IIIII 12
98*, 99,103, 109, r24*,125*,, 126, 133, 134, 135*, 138, 150, 152, 156*
1 58, 166, lJ 2, lJ 3, lJ 6, 795,, 207,, 214*, 215*, 216, 27J *, 218, 220*, 229*
P ar ame c ium multimi c r o nuc I e atum BJ , 89, 152,, lJ 6, 229*
Paramecium putrinum 8, 13*, 18,22,,85*, 90, 98*, 124*,134, 135*,152,, 156*, 160, 169,173,,207, IIIII4l
214*,21J*,220*,229*
Paramecium trichium -+ Paramecium putrinum
P ar ap o dop hry a s ol iformi s t04 rY l4t 6
Paraurostyla weissei 9, 31* ,ZlJ'k r1260
Paruroleptus caudatus 6l , 90, 123, 193, 220*
Paruroleptus musculus 90, 135*, 173 (now Uroleptus musculus) II248
o P elagodileptus trachelioides detailed data, see page 232
o P elagohalteria cirrifera detailed data, see page 566 rlt44
o P elagohalteria viridis detailed data, see page 569
o P elagolacrymaria moserae detailed data, see page 265
o P elagolacrymaria rostrata detailed data, see page 266
o P elagostrombidium fallax detailed data, see page 585
o P ela gostrombidium mirabile detailed data, see page 590
o P elagothrix alveolata 13* 160
o P elagothrix chlorelli gera detailed data, see page 395
o P elagothrix plancticola detailed data, see page 401
o P elagotrichidium faurei deta led data, see page 683
o P elagovasicola cinctum deta led data, see page 273
o P elagovorticella mayeri detailed data, see page 480 IIl1 1B
o P elagovorticella natans detailed data, see page 482 rrltzt
Pelodinium reniforme ) 63 rrl437
P e nardie lla ophry o g I e na 7l
o P hascolodon contractilis t34
o P hascolodon vorticella detailed data, see page 693 TI98

General Ecology
mz
I axa References3'4'5 Ciliate Atlas6
Philasterides armatus 90,220* rrr1224
Physalophrya spunxosa 2t9
P lac'us ovum 90
Placus striatus+ 90
P la giocampa me tabolic'a 2t9
Plagioc'ctmpa minor 219
P la gi o c anxpa mutah i I i s 2t9
P lagiocampa rouxi ))* , 61, 123,201 ,220* ITII3]3
P la giocampa sas sy ke ns i s 220*
Plagiopyla nasuta ) 5, l3r" 18, 22,39*,56,63,13,J4,92, 126, l3B, l58, 160, 1J3, 193,201 rY 1266
P lagiopyla ovata+ 116
Platycola longicollis 160
P latynema sociale 135* (now Platynematum sociale) rrrlzs6
P laty ne matum s o I iv a g um 220*
Platyophrya nana 219 (now P seudoplatyophrya nana; strictly terrestrial)
P laty op hry) a s p un1ac o la 123 (terrestrial)
Pleuronenla chrysalis 22 (a synonym of Pleuronema crassum)
P leuronema coronatum 5,J,8, 13*, 86, 732,135*, 220*,222 IIUZ7B
Pleuronema crassum 8, l3*, 135*, 138,229* IIU285
Pleuronema cyclidium -> Cyclidium brandoni
P leuronema puytoraci 90
Pleurotric:ha grandis 22, 167 rl2t s
Podophrya bengalensis 216
Podophrya brevipoda t21
o Podophrya cyc:lopum 82
Podophrya.fixa 22, 5l*,214* ,216,229* rY 1465
Podophrya libera 729,203*
Prorodon armatus 134, l3B, l6J ,218,219
Prorodon hrachyodon l
Prorodon cinereus 90
P r or odo n c o rp ule nti s s imum 56,73
Prorodon discolor -; Holophrya discolor
o Prorodon garganellae 60,222
Prorodon laurenti l
Prorodon mimeticus+ 160, 172 (now Pleurofragma)
o Prorodon morula 60
Prorodon niveus l3* 160 ilu346
Prorodon ovum --> Holophrya ovum
Prorodon platyodon 160
Prorodon teres -+ Holophrya teres
P rorodon viridis EHRENBERG l3l , l3B, 218, 219
Prorodon viridis KAHL synonym with -+ Holophrya oyum
P s e udoc hilodo nop sis al giv ora 109,220* rl62
o P s e udoc ine toc hil um p ulc he llum 222
P s e udoc o hnilemhus p us illus 12*, 13*, 85*, 135*, 160, 229* IITI27 I
o P se udohaplocaulus anahae nae 23,92, 702, 111, 712, 120, 132, 136*, 138, 146, lJ2, lJ6, 189, 196, l98,
2tB
o P s e udo hap I o c aul u s infr' av ac uo lat us detailed data, see page 501
P seudokeronopsis rubra+ B, 134
P s e udomic' r ot horax dub ius 8
P s e udop r o r o do n armatus l3* (now Prorodon armatides)
P s e udop r o r odo n far c tus 22
Pseudoprorodon niveus -+ Prorodon niveus
P seudoprorodon sulcatus 13*,90, 160

General Ecology
m t 2 axa Referena"r3'o'' Ciliate Atlas6
P s e udop ror odo n v e sic' ulatus t34
o P s e udo str omb i di um p lanc to ntic' unt detailed data, see page 685
P s e udov o r r i t' e I I a mar gar i tata 32* , 124'k , 135*, 160, 222,229*
P se udovot'tic e I I a moni lata 7J , l2l , 135 r" 159 , 219 , 229* , 232 rrl130
P s e udov o t' ti t' e I I a nt o n i lata I oc kv, ood i 60
P s e udot,orti c e I la v e stita 2ll*
Psi\otricha sncc'isa l0
P yxidium cothurnioides 2r2*
o Rhabdoaske nasia minima detailed data, see page 161
Rhabdostyla bt'evipes 212*
R habdos ty I a c o n gr e gata 229*
o Rhabdostyla c'onipes 219
R habdo sty I a n e h ul if'e ra I 35*
Rhabdostyla ot,unt -+ Epistylis pygntaeum
R habdo sty I a py r ifo rmi s -+ E,pisty I is py gntae um
Rhabdo sty I a s p hae r o ide s t6l
R ha gado stoma c omp I e t um 10, ll2
Rhopalophrya acuta 115,201
o R i mo strontbid i um arme ni e ns i s detailed data, see page 595
o R i m o s t r o m b i d i unt l'trac hy lci n e tu nt detailed data, see page 606
c Rimostrombidium humile detailed data, see page 6l I rlts9
o Rimostonbidium hyal inunt detailed data, see page 609
o Rimostrombidium lacustris detailed data, see page 596
o Rimostrombidium velox detailed data, see page 604
Saprodinium dentatum ) 50* ,20J LU446
Saprodi n i um d ifl'i c i le ) 56.13
Saprodinittm ntimcticum I J3,7 4,220*
S aytr op hi lus nt u sc or unt -+ Sothrophilus musclrunt
S at hr op hi I us m u s c 0r un1 n2 tr1259
Sathrophilus putrinus I 60 (now Tetrahynle na pyrif'ormi s) ITU6I
Sc'yphidia physarum 218
Solenophrya crassa 2lB
S pctt hi d i o i d e s s ul c ata 207
o Spathidiosus bursa 60,222
o S pathidi um c'arupanella 60,222
o Spathidium faurei 52, 160
S pathidium I i e be r kue h ni t34
Spathidium melophorme t73
S p at h idi u m nto n i I iJ'o r me 216
Spathidium porculus 134, 138
Spathidiunt spathula 23 , 90, 1 I 0, ll 6, 218, 220*
S p at hi d i unt v e r ni c' ul us 219
Spathidium viride l3l ,l4
Sphaerophrya ruagna 219 rY l4t3
Sphaerophrya stokesii 218
o S p ir e te I I a p la nc'ti c' ola detailed data, see page 688
S p i r ofi I um t uh i c: o I a natans t0
S p i r o s t o m Ltm antb i g uunt 4, l2*- , 13*, 5 I *, 53, 6J , 68, 92, 134, 158, 160, 166, IBJ , 193, 207 , 215* TU317
ZlJ * , 229*
S p i r o s t o n't Ltm,fi I unt 193 (synonym of S. caudatum) TU324
S p ir o stomum i nt e rm e dium 134, 193
Spirostomunl minus 13*,24,92, 114, 734, 138, 1 60,21J* rrl327
Spirostomum teres 12* ,, 79, 24, 25, 35, 6J , 68, J 4, 92, ll4, 126, 134, 135*, 138, 1 47 , l4B, 150, rrl332
151 ,158, l6l, 166, lJz, 186, 18J,193,207,213,220*,223
Spirotricha teres 133 (likely a misspelling of Spirostomum teres)
47

Ecology
m2
t axa References3'4'5 Ciliate Atlas6
Spirozona c'audata 220*
o Staurophrya elegans detailed data, see page 727 rY 1420
Steinia platystoma t6 u336
o Stenosemella lacustt'is deta led data, see page 618
o Stentor amethystinus deta led data, see page 664 rrl339
o Stentor araLtcanus deta led data, see page 671
Stentor coeruleus 12*,13*,28,,31*, 44,46,50*,51*,86,92, ll0, 133,134, 135*, 138, 146, 150, 1U351
152, I 61, I 66, I 6J, lJ 2, 19 l, 193, 205, 212*, 21 5*, 21 6, 217 *-, 220*-, 222, 229*
Stentor gallinulus 186
Stentor igneus 60, I 61,222,229* I.1346
Stentor muelleri 12*,13*, 90, 134, r50,219 trl363
Stentor multiformis 60,ll ,222 rrl3st
Stentor niger 18, 36, 60, 123, 149§, 205, 212*, 222 rrl3ss
Stentor polymorphus 3,J,8, 10, 72*, 13*, 14*,22,31*, 39*,50*, 51*, 558, 87, BB, 92, 93, gJ*, II/368
9B*, ll4, ll9, l2l, 124*, 131 , 132, 133, 134, 135* , 146,, l4g, r52, 153,
155*, 158, 161, 1 66, 203*, 205, 2148, 215*, zlJ*, 2lB, 219,, 222, 229*
Stentor roeselii J,8, 10, 13*, 14*,46,,50*,51*, 60,11,77,86,90, gg, 103, 110, 130, 132, rrl314
133, 134, 150, 155*, 161, 162*,166, lJ3, 196,203*,21J*-,219,222
Stichotricha aculeata r26 r1203
S tichotric ha aculeata sapropelica 160, 193
Stichotricha secunda 22 rl2t0
o Stokesia vernalis detailed data, see page 439 rru200
S t r o b i I i diunt ac unti nat um + 90, fl2
Strohilidium caudatum 2, 6, J,, B, 10, 12*, 23, 26, 2J, 29, 40, 43, 5 1*, 52, 60, J9,, 81, 9J*, 70J, 123, rlt53
124*, 125*, 126, 133,, 134,, 135*, l3J, 138, l4J, 150, 166, 172, 185, lg3,
20J ,219,222,224
Strobilidium cometa 90
o Strobilidium conicunt 186 (possibly a synonym of -+ Rimostrontbidium humile)
Strobilidium gyrans -+ S trohilidium caudatum
Strobilidium huntile -+ Rimo strombidium humil e
Strobilidium minimum+ 86, ll2
S tr o b ilidium o c ulatum t 15, t7, 18
Strobilidium velor -+ Rimostrombidium v e lox
S tr ombidinop s i s c lapar e de i -+ Strobilidium caudatum
S tr omb idino p s i s g)) r ans -+ T i nti nni dium s e mi c il i atum
S trombidinop s i s s e ti g era 21, 52, 60,222
Strombidium acutum 182 (possibly S. acuminatum?)
S tr o mb idiunt c o nic o ide s + l2l, 134, 2r8
S tr o ntb idium c y c li ndr om o r p hun + t]2
S tr ombidium de lic ati s s imum + 41
o Strombidium elatum 2tt
Strontbidium gyrans -+ S tr obilidium c' audatunt
S t r o mb i diunt la g e nul a+ t34
Strombidium mirabile -+ P elagostrombidium mirabi le
S t r o ntb i di um s ul c at um + 8, 1 0, 11 , 92, r2l
o Strombidium tintinnoide s ll2,2l9
Strombidium turbo 11,22,60, I10,205 (synonym with --> Strobilidiunt caudatum)
Strombidium vestitum+ 2t9
Strontbidium viride -+ Limnostrombidium viride
Strongylidium crassum 114,, ll5,ll3
S tr o n gy I i dium lah iatum 90
S tr o n gy lidium lan c e o latum 58, 103
Stylocomete s di gitatus 22
Stylonychia histrio --> H istriculus histrio
S ty I o ny c hia ma kr o s ty la 22

Ecology
m I 2 axa References3'4'5 Ciliate Atlas6
Sty I o nyc hia ru1ttilas complex B, 10, 12*, l3*, l4'k,22,29, 46,50*, B5*, 90,92,98*,, 109, 1 15, 132, 134, rl3ts
I35*, I38, 155r" 156*, 166, 214* , 215'F, 2lJ*, 218, 220*, 229*
S ty I o nyc' hi a n otop h ora 90
S ty I o ny c' hi a p us tu I at a 10, 1 2)' ,22, 86, 92,98*, 135* ,214* , 216,220ä'= ,229'k r1323
Stylonyc'hia putrina 2ll* u329
o Sulcigera comoso 60,90,222
Tac hy s oma pe I li one ll,unt 2, 10, 13*, 3 1*, 61,J6,90, 123, 132, 134, 135*, 2lJ*, 218, 220'k, 229'k r1304
o T e tr e adro p hrya p I an c to n i c'a I 4* , 203*
Tetrahymena corlissi 6l
T e t ra hy n't e na py r ifo r nris complex J , l2*, I 3* , 8J ,89, 90, 9'7* ,98*, 135*, 152, 153, 1 60,219, 220* ITU6I
Tetrahyntena setosa 90, 60
o Teuthophrys tt'isulca trisulc'a deta led data, see page 238
o T c uth o1t h ry s tt' i s Ltl ca afi'i ca nu deta led data, see page 238
T hi gmo gas te r p otamop h i I us 229*
T h u r i c o I a .f'o I I i c' u I a ta B ru2t3
Thylacidium truncatum l86
Tillina magna 10 (now in genus Colpoda)
o Ti nti nnid i unt ep hemer i dunt detailed data, see page 636
o T i nt i nn i d i unt J'l uv i ati I e detailed data, see page 637 rlt63
o T i t t t i n rt i tl i r utt f'l r t v i tt t i I c c v I i n rl r i c ct 132, 134, 138,222
o Tintinnidium fluviatile ntinima 132, 134, 138
o Ti nti nnidi unt pusi llunt detailed data, see page 642 rl t68
T int i n nidiu nt s e nt i t' i I i at u nt 9, lJ , 52, 58, 60, 1 19, 121 , 125'k , l3B, I J2,218,220,222,229'k ut72
o Tintinnopsis cotlus 2t9
Tintinnopsis c'ratera 136 (see -+ Codctnella cratera)
o T i nti nnop si s c:y I i ndt'ata detailed data, see page 648 r1118
o Tintinnopsi s davidojji i c'yli ndric'a 60,222
minima
o Tintinnopsis formosa 60,222
T inti nnop si s kara.j ac e n s i s+ 222
o Ti nti nnop s i s kara.j ac: e nsi s mi ninru 60
o T i nti nnop s i s I ob i anc o i .fus iformi s 60,222
minima
o Tintinnopsis mcnnieri nininru 60,222
o T i nt i nnop s i s potiform i,s 219
o T i nti n nop si s pyriform i s 60,222
Tintinnopsis sinensis 23 1 (synonym with --> Codonello cratera)
T i rtti tt nop s i s s ubp i sti ll unt 231 (synonym with -+ Codonella cratera)
T inti n nolts i s tubu I osa + 9, I 1, I 38,222
o Tintinnopsis tubulosa minima 60, I 60,222
Tintinnopsis w,angi 219,23 I (synonym with -+ Codonella cratera)
o T i n t i nno p si s w, t'u)) i 200
Tokopht'ya carc'hesii 14*,203* rv l4t1
Tokophrya c'yclopunt 202
Tokoltht'ya ornata 160
T o kop hrya c1 nadr iparti ta 22, 55*, B5*, I 1 l, l39,2lB rY l4t t
Trachelius ovum 8, 10, 12*, 13*, 22, 28, 34, 41, 51*, 53, 60,J5, 1 13, 121, 123, 125*, 133, 134, IV/2OB
I 38, 1 47 , 160, 1 66, l6J , lJ0, l9l ,205,212* ,214* ,217* ,218,221 ,222,229*
T rac h e I o p h y I I um ap i c: ul at unt 22, 31'r" 6 l, 134, 204, 220'k IV/1BO
Trac he I op hy I lum c lt i I e ns e 109, 134
Trac' h e lophy II um c lavatum 229*
o T r a c' he I o p hy I I u m .fl av i c a n s 60.222
T ra c h e I op h _v I I um p us i I I u nt 55*, [04
T rac he I op hy I lunt s i gmo i d e s l3* t26
o Tri cltodina domer guei me ganti c'r'o- detailed data, see page 479
nucleatus

General Ecology
m I 2 axa References3'4'5 Ciliate Atlas6
Trichodina pedic:ulus detailed data, see page 472 IU304
Trichop e lma e ugl e niv ora 172 (now in genus Leptopharynx)
Trichopelma opaca 172 (now in genus Leptopharynr)
T r i c hop hry a e p i s ty lide s 222
Tric:hospira inversa ) 160
Trimyema compressum ) 98*, 160,201 III/4OB
T ri thi gmo stoma c ucul I ulus J, 10, 12*, 13*, 22, 31*, 50*, 51*, B5*, 87, BB, 89, 93, 98*, 99, 109, 124*, TI82
125*, 134, 135*, l3J, 138, 146, 151, 153, 166, 193, 195, 214*, 215*, 216,
217 * , 218, 220* , 229*
T r it hi g mo s t o nta s t e ini 7, B, 10 ue2
Trochilia ruinuta 22, 123, 135r" 220* uttl
Tropidoatractus acuminatus ) 73,74,160 tu420
Turaniella vitrea 220*
Urnula epistylidis 22
Urocentrum turho 2, B, 9, 10, 23, 28, 35, 52,55*, 86, 134, 135*, 150, l58, 160, 201 , 212* III/I B7
220*,222
Uroleptus contortus 1l
Uroleptus dispar 29
Uroleptus pisc'is l3*, 1 4*, 22,,98*, 138, I 6J, LJ2,, 203* rl2s2
Uroleptus zignis+ t6
(Jronema dubiunt 60,222 (now Balanonema dubiunt)
(Jronema halophila t04,220*
(Jronema ntarinum 5l*, 54, 9B*, 123,138,20J,216,220* (likely synonym with U. nigricans)
Uronema nigricans 6,, 13*, l4*, 18, 55*, 126, 193,203*,224 ITII22B
Urosoma cienkowskii 160
U r o s oma p I a nc' to nti c um -+ P s e udo s t r o mb idium p lan c' t o nti c um
Urospina bicaudata -+ Psilotricha succisa
UrosQla grandis 9, I 3*, I 14,220* u222
Urostyla weissci -+ P arauro s ty la w e i s s e i
o Urotric'ha agilis deta led data, see page 348 uu349
o U rotricha apsheronica deta led data, see page 302
U rotricha armata (synonym of ) U. platystonta)
o Urotricha castalia deta led data, see page 335
Urotricha dragescoi detailed data, see page 361
o Urotricha.farcta deta led data, see page 351 tru3s2
o Urotricha.f'urcata deta led data, see page 344 ilu366
o IJrotricha globosa deta led data, see page 357 IIrl360
o U rotricha halteriiformi s 9l ,'
o Urotricha mac'rostoma deta led data, see page 346
o (Jrotricha ntatthesi matthesi deta led data, see page 340
o (Jrotricha nrutthesi tristicha deta led data, see page 342
Urotricha nais 140
Urotricha ohliqua -+ Longifr"a gma obliq ua
Urotricha ovata 6l rrrl35l
o Urotricha pelagica deta led data, see page 309
Urotricha platystoma deta led data, see page 359
o (J rotricha pse udoJurcata deta led data, see page 347
Urotricha saprophila 5, 160, t93
o (J rotricha simo nsber geri deta led data, see page 324
o Urotricha valida deta led data, see page 313
o (Jrotricha venatrix deta led data, see page 3 l5
Urozona buetschlii I 35* ,207 ,29*
V a g i nic' o la c ry stal I ina I 1 1, 1 12, 135*, 202,,218
Vaginicola ingenita 2lB,2l9 il1283
Vaginicola longicolis 22

General Ecology
m I 2 axa References3'4'5 Ciliate Atlas6
Vaginicola terricola 1 35*
Vasicola lutea 165
Vorticella alha B
Vorticella anahaenae -+ P s e udohaplocaulus anabae nae
V orti c e lla aq uadul c i s complex detailed data, see page 486 rrl59
o Vorticella bosminae 213
Vorticella brevistyla l10,16l
Vorticella campanula 10, 12*,l3*, 14*,22,45,46,50*, 55*, 85*, 93,94,98*, 99,101, 104, 106, ryl05
l0l , rl9,124*,125*,, 134, 135*, l4l ,148,160, 1J2, 195,203*,214*,215*,,
216,, 217 * , 2lB, 219 , 220*
o V orticella c:hlorellata detailed data, see page 491
Vorticella citrina 60, 1 60,222,229* (a member of the V. convallaria complex)
Vorticella conochili 111, l12,2lB
Vorticella conosoma 60,222
V o rt i c e I la c o nv allaria complex B, 10, 12*,22,23,44,50*,61,J6,82, B5*, 93,94,95, 108, 124*,135*, 138, III84
156*, ll2, 195, 202, 214*, 215*, 216, 2lJ *,, 218, 219, 222, 229*
Vorticella cupifera 219
V ortic ella cyclopicola 31 II
Vorticella dilatata 112
Vorticella dimorpha 198
V ortic e lla fas c i c ulata 103 (now P seudovorticella fasciculata)
Vorticella fromenteli 2lJr, rrltt6
Vorticella globosa 216
Vorticella gracilis 220*
Vorticella hyalina 198
Vorticella incisa 124* ,229*
V ortic e lla infusionum complex 61, 126 III64
Vorticella longifilum 212*
V o rtic e I la mar g aritata -+ P s e udovortic ella mar garitata
Vorticella marginata l2*
Vorticella marina+ 14*,203*
Vorticella mayeri + P elagovorticella mayeri
V ortic e lla micros c opica 16l ,229*
V ortic e lla mic r o s t oma complex g, 12*, 13*, 14*, lJ, 78,22, 48, 49,85*, 93,98*, 109, 124*, 135*, 159, ITI78
ll2, l8B, 195,203* ,214* ,,215* ,276,21J*,218,219,220* ,,229*
Vorticella monilata -+ P seudovortic ella monilata
Vorticella mutans 220* (now in genus Pseudovorticella)
Vorticella natans ; P elagovorticella natans
V ort i c e I la ne bulife ra + 8, 10, 14*,,22,32*, 60,J6,93,124*,125*,133, 134, 138, 148, 154, 155*
202,203*,215*,229* (a marine member of the V. convallaria complex)
Vorticella octava complex l95,ZlJ*, 219, 229* ilfis
Vorticella pelagica -+ Haplocaulus pelagicus
Vorticella picta 72*,94, 159,229* II/101
Vorticella putrina 8,92
V ortic e lla r hahdo sty I o ide s lJ5, 183,235
Vorticella similis 13*, 32*,90, 124*,1J3,184, 200,219,222,229* (a member of theV. con-
vallaria complex)
Vorticella sphaerica 103, 111, 112, 131,132,200,218
Vorticella striata octava --> Vorticella octava complex
V ortic e lla te le sc opoide s 2ll*
Vorticella venusta 220*
o Vorticella vernalis detailed data, see page 494
Vorticella vestita -+ P seudovorticella ve stita
o W enrichia colpidioide s 117, 118
Woodruffia rostrata 8, l0
Zoothamnium arbuscula 12*,22,92, l14, 115, 138,215*, 2ll* rrlt52

General Ecology
m2
t axa References3'4'5 Ciliate Atlas6
Zoothantniunt elegans 13*,215*
Zoot hantni unt I i ntne ti c unr -+ E, p i c a rc: he s i u nt p e c'tinatunt
Zoothantni nm ninintunt 124*
Zo ot h antn i um p e c: ti nat u nt -+ E picat'chesi unt pectinatunt
Zoot hantni u m ramo s i s s i m unt 2291,
Zoothctntnium simpler t34
Zoothantnium t,arians 124*, 135*
Zo s te rodasy s a gamal i ev i 90
Zo ste r odasy s t ra n sv e r sa 220* IIII4IB
References: I = ANDRE (1915),2 = ANDRE (1914),3 = AMBERG (1903),4 = ALEYA & HARTMANN (1995),5 = AMBLARD et al.
(1994),6=AMBLARDetal.(1993),7=ALEKPEROV&KRYUCHKOV(1982),8=ALEKPEROV(1982),9=ALEKPEROV(1984a),
l0=ALEKPEROV(1980),ll=ALEKPEROV(1983),12=BERECZKY(1911),13=BERECZKY(1977a),14=BELIKHOFF(1936),15
= BEAVER et al. (1988), l6 = BEAVER & CRISMAN (1982), t7 = BEAVER & CRISMAN (1990), l8 = BEAVER & CRISMAN (1989a),
19 = BARK & GOODFELLOW (1985),20 = BARBIERI & GODINHO ORLANDI (1989a), 2l = BARBIERI & GODINHO ORLANDI
(1989b),22 = BALDENSPERGER (1927a),23 = BELOVA (1994),24 = BARK (1981),25 = BARK (1985),26 = BALDENSPERGER
(1921b),27 = ARSLANOVA (1980), 28 = BIGELOW (1923),29 = BICK & SCHOLTYSECK (1960), 30 = BERECZKY (1975a), 31 = AN-
on6 ltszo;,32 = BERECZKv & NosEK (1994),33 = BRABRAND et at. (1983),34 = BowNrK-DvLTNSKA (rgsl),35 = BoVEE
(1960), 36 = BIENERT et al. (1991), 37 = BEUSCHOLD (1961), 38 = BERNINGER et al. (1986), 39 = BERECZKY (t9t9a),40 = CAR-
RIAS et at. (1996),41 = CANTER etat. (1992),42 = CAIRNS & YONGUE (1966),43 = eÜnCl et al. (1985),44 = BRUTSCHY (1922),45
= CHANDRAN Et AI. (I998), 46 = DÖRR (1935),4] = DICKMAN (I968), 48 = DADAY (I885), 49 = DADAY (I907), 50 = CZERNIN-
CHUDENTTZ (1958), 5l = CASPERS & SCHULZ (1960),52 = FAURE-FREMTET (1924),53 = EHLERS (1965),54 = EDMONDSON
(1920),55 = FERRARI et al. (1989),56 = ESTEBAN et al. (1993a),57 = ESTEBAN et al. (1993b),58 = FINLAY & ESTEBAN (1998),59 =
FINLAY et al. (1996), 60 = GAJEWSKAJA (1933), 6l = FOISSNER (1980b), 62 = FINLAY (1981), 63 = FINLAY et at. (1991),64 =
GUHL & FINLAY (1993),6s = GOULDER (1914),66 = GOULDER (1980),67 = GOULDER (19'72),68 = GOULDER (1975),69 = GIL-
BERT (1989), 70 = GELEI (1944),11 = GELEI (1954),12 = HAVENS & BEAVER (t991),13 = GUHL et al. (1996), 74 = GUHL et al.
(1994),7s =HOLLOWDAY (1979),'76=HELD(1937),77 =KAPLTN (1969), 18 =JÖSA O914), 19 =HUNr&CHETN(r983),S0=
JERSABECK & SCHABETSBERGER (1996), 8l = JACK et al. (1993), 82 = IMHOF (1892), 83 = IMHOF (1883), 84 = IMHOF (1884), 85
= PUJIN (1994),86 = KOVALCHUK & SVINTSOVA(1994),87 = KOMALA PRZYBOS (1995),88 = KOMALA & PRZYBOS (1994),89
= KOMALA (1996),90 = KRAINER (1988),91 = KOVALCHUK & BABKO (1989),92 = KORNIYENKO (19'72),93 = KLIMOWICZ
(1973),94 = KERR (1983), 95 = LE RoUX (190'7),96 = LAYBOURN-PARRY & ROGERSON (1993), 97 = LACKEY (1942),98 =
LACKEY (1938b),99 = KUCKLENTZ & METZNER (1980), 100 = LAYBOURN-PARRY et al. (1997), l0l = LAYBOURN-PARRY et al.
(1994), 102 = LAVRENTYEV (1989), 103 = KUSTOVLYANKINA (1990), 104 = MADONI (1996), 105 = MACEK et al. (1996), 106 =
LUK'JANOVIÖ0974),tO7=LUK',JANOVLÖ{I973), 108=LUGOetal.(1998), 109=MArrS(1911),fio=MARSSON(1901),ill=
MAMAYEVA(1975), l12=MAMAEVA(1976a), l13=MADONI(1990), l14=LIYEPA(1984b), l15=LIYEPA(1984a), l16=MIRA-
CLE et al. (1992), 111 = MIRABDULLAEV (1989), ll8 = MIRABDULLAEV (1988), l19 = MIEGEL (1982), 120 = MAZHEIKAITE
(1969), 121 = MORDUKHAJ-BOLTOVSKAJA (1965), 122 = MTRABDULLAEV (1985), r23 = MÜCKE 1t979), 124 = NOSEK &
BERECZKY (1994), 125 = NEBRAT (1992),126 = NAUWERCK (1996),127 = NAEF et al. (1996), 128 = NAEF & MARTIN (1994), 129
= NAEF & MARTIN (1990), 130 = MYLNIKOVA (t992b), 13l = MYLNIKOVA (1992a), 132 = MYLNIKOVA (1993), 133 = OLEKSIV
et at. (1986), 134 = OLEKSIV (1985), 135 = NOSEK & BERECZKY (1981), 136 = NIKOLAEV (1979),131 = NEBRAT (1975), 138 = NE-
BRAT(1980), 139=NAEF&MARTIN(1985), 140=MUNOZeral.(1987), l4l =PETKOVI1 0979), 142=PERRTSS&LAYBOURN-
PARRY (1991), 143 = PERRISS et al. (1993), 144 = PERRISS et al. (1995), 145 = PACE (1982), t46 = OLEKSIV (1985a), 147 =
PETROVA et at. (1976),148 = PETROVA & SMIRNOVA (1974), t49 = PETKOVIÖ & PETKOVIÖ (1978), 150 = PACKROFF (1992) and
PACKROFF & WTLBERT (r991), l5r = PRZYBOS & KOMALA (1995), 152 = PRZYBOS & FOKIN (r997), r53 = PRZYBOS (1996),
154 = ROSSOLIMO (1923), 155 = QUIRMBACH (1912), 156 = PUJIN et al. (1984), 157 = PSENNER & SCHLOTT-IDL (1985), 158 =
PROKESOVÄ ( l 9s9), ls9 = PRArr & ROSEN ( 1983), 160 = RECK ( 1987), l6 l = SCHNETDER (19S0), r62 = SKORTKOW ( l 90s), 163 =
§Ivsr et al. (1996), 164 = SIMEK et al. (1995), 165 = srENSoN (1984), 166 = STEINMANN & SURBECK (1934), 161 = STEHLE
(1s23), 168 = st-ÄoeÖB« & SLÄDEÖKOYA (997), 169 = STRÜDER-KYPKE (1996), r70 = vorcr (1903), l7l = vrRrEUx (r916),
172=TROSHINA(1994), 173=TIMOFEEVA(1989), 174=ZYKOFF (1905), 175=ZIMMERMANN(1995, 1996), 1'76 =ZHARIKOV
(1983), tl7 = ZACHARIAS (1900a), 178 = ZACHARIAS (1894a), 179 = ZACHARIAS (1902), 180 = XU (1992, 1993), l8l = wOL-
TERECK (1906), 182 = WTCKHAM & GILBERT (1993), 183 = SCHNEIDER (1909), 184 = SCHÖNBORN (1985), 185 = SCHÖN-
BERGER (1994a),186 = SCHLOTT-IDL (1984), 187 = SCHLOTT-IDL (1986), 188 = SANDERS et al. (1989), 189 = RUTTNER (1937),
190 = ROUX (I9OO), 19I = SLÄDEÖEK 09'72), 192 = SKIBBE (1994), 193 = SIME NGANDO & GROLIERE (I99I), SIME-NGANDO &
HARTMANN (1991) and SIME-NGANDO et al. (1990), 194 = SHCHERBAKOV (1969), 195 = STILLER (1937), 196 = SMIRNOVA
(198'1), 197 = SLÄDEÖKOVÄ & SLÄDEÖEK (1960), 198 = STTLLER (1940), 199 = WESENBERG-LUND (19s2), 200 = WATLES
(1939), 201 = TOSCHI (1937),202 = THOMAS (1964),2o3 = ZYKoFF (1902),204 = ZACHARIAS (1902a),205 = ZACHARIAS (1893),
206 = ZACHARIAS (1895), 207 = WILBERT (1969), 208 = ALEKPEROV (1984d), 209 = ALEKPEROV (1984b), 210 = ALEKPEROV
(1984e), 2l I = ALEKPEROV (1985), 212 = ALLEN (1920),213 = FINLAY et al. (1988), 214 -- BERECZKY (1979b), 215 = KOSOVA
(1965),216 = BATTISH (1992),211 = KLIMOWICZ (1981),218 = ZHARIKOV & ROTAR (1992),219 = GONG (1986),220 = KO-
VALCHUK (1991a),221 = ALEKPEROV (1990),222=OBOLKINA (1995), 223 =LAYBOURN-PARRY et al. (1990),224 = CARRIAS
52

General Ecology
et ar. (1998), 225 =LAYBOTJRN-PARRY & PERRISS (tggs),226 = YASTNDI & LYNN (1995),221 = GARCiA & NrELL (1995),228 =
TAMAR (1911),229 = BERECZKY (1995),23O = FOTSSNER (1993),231 = NrE (1933),232 = SCHWEIZER(1994),233 = JÜRGENS er
al. (1999),234 = LAUTERBORN (r894),235 = JARNEFELT (1934b).
I
Species from all kinds of true pelagic habitats (epilimnion, metalimnion, hypolimnion, water body of large rivers, epiplanktonic species)
are included. Note that many basically benthic species colonize microaerobic or anaerobic hypolimnions; these are also included. Not
considered are: planktonic records from heavily polluted running waters because such habitats are heavily influenced by the river bed; lit-
toral records and records from very small water bodies (rain puddles etc.) because these are heavily influenced by the aufwuchs and sedi-
ment community; taxa not identified to species level (all "sp."); not clearly specified records, mainly from inland salt waters. Furthermore,
many papers which contain only species treated in our book are not included because the detailed descriptions contain all records. We
emphasize that the list is usually not cleared of synonyms to maintain the original data. Clearing this list needs much further and
rather controversial work. Many synonyms or supposed synonyms can be found in the indexes of the books cited in footnote 2.
2
The authors and dates of the taxa are omitted because they are not necessary in the context of this compilation, which is intended to show
species recorded from pelagic habitats. Often, authors and dates can be found in the references provided; be aware, however, that both,
and also the species names, are often incorrect (misspellings etc.). More accurate names and dates for many taxa are contained in the
monographs by FOISSNER & FOISSNER ( I 988a), FOISSNER et at. ( 199 I , 1992c, 1994, I 995), CORLISS ( 1979), KENT ( I 880-1 882),
and KAHL (1930, 193 l, 1932, 1935).
3
A freshwater species marked with a black dot is considered as euplanktont if it matches at least one of the following criteria: (i) has spe-
cial morphological features; (ii) the whole group lives pelagically, for instance, oligotrichs; (iii) it was originally described from the pela-
gial of large water bodies; (iv) several reliable pelagic records are available.
4
Secondary literature usually not included.
5
Note that papers which contain only species treated in detail in our book are not referenced in this compilation because details can be
found in the individual species descriptions. Furthermore, only few taxa were identified to species level in many faunistic and ecological
papers on plankton ciliates; all "sp." are not listed.
6
Detailed description in Volumes I, II, III, IV of the "Ciliate Atlas" (FOISSNER et at. 1991, 1992c, 1994, 1995).
+ Very likely misidentified because reliable records known only from marine biotopes and saline inland lakes.
o See footnote 3.
t
Obligate anaerobes.
*
Record from river plankton.
§ Pelagic record from saline inland waters.
At least 725 species have been recorded from freshwater and saline inland pelagials worldwide (Table 3.6).
Forty-six of them are basically marine, indicating that the freshwater records are misidentifications. Conse-
quently,679 freshwater species (synonyms not included) have been found in the plankton, but only about 180 are
euplanktonic, that is, live exclusively or mainly in the water column. All others are primarily benthic and/or ses-
sile on nonpelagic substrates. Certainly, a considerable number of these records are misidentifications or guests.
Furthermore, many basically benthic species colonize the lake snow or drifting aggregates in the
potamoplankton, and many colonize anaerobic hypolimnions. The following 32 benthic species have been re-
corded more than 15 times from the pelagial (Table 3.6): Aspidisca cicada, Carchesium polypinum, Chilodonella
uncinata, Cinetochilum margaritaceum, Colpodium colpoda, Colpoda cucullus, Cyclidium glaucoma, Dileptus
anser, Epistylis plicatilis, Euplotes patella, Holophrya discolor, H. simplex, Litonotus cygnus, Loxodes striatus,
Paramecium aurelia complex, P. bursaria, P. caudatum, P. putrinum, Plagiopyla nasuta, Spirostomum am-
biguum, S. teres, Stentor coeruleus, S. polymorphus, S. roeselii, Strobilidium caudatum, Stylonychia mytilus
complex, Trachelius ovum,Trithigmostoma cucullulus, Urocentrum turbo,Vorticella campanula,V. convallaria
complex, V. microstoma complex. Some of these, for example, Aspidisca cicada, Euplotes pdtella, Spirostomum
spp., and Trithigmostoma cucullulus are so characteristic that misidentifications are unlikely. Others can be eas-
ily confused with euplanktonic species, especially when preserved material is used for identification. For exam-
ple, we never found Trachelius ovum ftr our samples, indicating that it was at least sometimes confused with -+
Paradileptus elephantinus, a common euplanktonic species. And the little known epiplanktonic -+ Vorticella
vernalis was certainly often confused with V. convallarid, one of the most common benthic peritrichs. Most of
the 32 species mentioned above can be identified with our "Ciliate Atlas" (FOISSNER et al. l99l , 1992c, 1994,
1995); thus, and because they are not eupelagic, they were not included in the present book.
About 6 7o (42) of the species found in freshwater plankton are anaerobes (marked by a lozenge in Table 3.6)
with special morphological and physiological adaptations (e.g., hydrogenosomes instead of mitochondria). They
occur mainly in anoxic hypolimnions and are distributed in 16 genera, namely Bothrostoma, Brachonella, Cae-
nomorpha, Discomorphella, Enchelyomorpha, Epalxella. Lagynus, Loxodes, Ludio, Metopus, Pelodinium, Pla-
53

General Ecology
giopyla, Saprodinium, Trichospira, Trirnyema, and Tropidoatractus. However, in spite of the common occur-
rence of such obligate anaerobes in the pelagial, no euplanktonic anaerobic ciliate is known (FENCHEL & FIN-
LAY 1995). Thus, and because most of them can be identified with our Ciliate Atlas (FOISSNER et aI. 1991,
1992c,1994, 1995), they were not included in the present book.
Most of the 619 species recorded from freshwater plankton belong to the gymnostomes (18.6 %), a primarily
predacious group, followed by peritrichs (filter feeders), hymenostomes (mainly filter feeders), prostomatids
(mainly omnivorous), and hypotrichs (filter feeders or omnivorous). The other taxa contribute less than l0 7o
each to the species inventory (Table 3.7). This distribution differs rather markedly from that obtained for the
species described in our book (Table 3.10). Using only these species, the gymnostomes comprise almost a
quarter, followed by prostomatids, oligotrichs, and peritrichs. All other groups contribute 15 7o (Table 3.7).
The plankton ciliate community is characterized by the high percentage of oligotrichs not found in any of the
other main biotopes (Table 3.7). Thus, FOISSNER et al. (1991) correctly classified the planktonic ciliate com-
munity as "Oligotrichetea". The dominance of the oligotrichs makes sense because they have an extremely ef-
fective feeding apparatus with strong and long membranelles used also for locomotion. The low proportion of
oligotrichs in benthic freshwater communities indicates that they colonized this biotope secondarily, that is,
from the pelagial. Looking at Table 3.7 in more detail, further interesting differences become obvious. The
benthic freshwater ciliate community is characterized by the high percentage of sessile forms, namely, peri-
trichs and suctorians. Hypotrichs (36 Vo) and colpodids (22 7o) dominate terrestrial environments, the latter be-
ing especially characteristic; thus, the terrestrial ciliate community has been designated as "Colpodetea" by
FOISSNER (1987a). The marine benthic ciliate community is charucterized by the high percentage of kary-
orelictids, a group with non-dividing macronuclei. Thus, we suggest naming it Karyorelictidetea nov. commu-
nity. It is clear from this compilation that each of the main biotopes has a distinct ciliate assemblage.,The rea-
sons for this are only partially self-explanatory, for example, the high proportion of sessile forms in benthic
freshwater habitats. On the other hand, the high percentage of prostomatids in the plankton ciliate community
is difficult to explain.
Table 3.7: Distribution of higher taxa, as percentage of species recorded, in different biotopes.
d
tu !O dJ L E\) tv !v
UE V!O LJ
Biotope Udo o oA-., (q o -l (1-< ) (1) ]-C t r C CJi <) ) ) !a o EJ ( o A) . ( l t < i U) zUa) PO ö( t1 r o Op (t- O l $<u r)r a (J al(t J- )
Freshwater pelagiall 2.2 2.2 18.6 9. I 14.3 10.3 0.4 3.1 6.2 n.2 tt.2 5.2
Eupelagic species2 2.5 0.9 24.6 2.5 5.1 3.4 0 0.9 l7.B 16. l 23.1 2.5
Freshwater (benthic and pe-
3.0 5.9 t2.5 t2.l l3.B 15. I 1.0 3.6 3.6 16.8 6.3 6.3
Iagic)3
Soila 2t.B 2.2 t] .B 4.1 4.0 36.0 0 4.4 0.1 s.9 t.l 2.0
Marine sand-5 0.2 t.4 14.4 6.8 l.B t5.l r 1.0 2.1 1.4 t2.4 8.1 1 1.5
I 679 species listed in Table 3.6.
2 The I 18 species described in this book (Table 3.10).
-1 304 species listed by FOISSNER et al. ( I 99 l, 1992c, 1994, 1995).
4 594 species listed by FOISSNER ( I 998, Table 4).
.5 1 I l6 species listed by PATTERSON et al. (1989; all groups except peritrichs and suctorians) and KAHL (1933, 1933a; peritrichs and suc-
torians).
As concems feeding strategies, the plankton ciliate community is unique by the high percentage of mixotrophs
(about237ov€rsus <JVoin allotherbiotopes; Table3.8).WeagreewithJONES (1994) andothersthatthisis
mainly due to food shortage (details, see chapter 3.2). This is supported by observations on ciliate communities
from Sphagnumbogs, another nutrient poor habitat, where zoochlorellae-bearing species are also very common
54

General Ecology
(GROLIERE 1911 , 1971a, 1978). Unfortunately, modern research on such habitats is lacking. The euplanktonic
ciliate community also shows a rather high percentage of algal feeders (25 To versts 13 Vo in primarily benthic
communities), obviously scooping off the autotrophic production. On the other hand, the percentage of filter
feeders (mainly bacterivores) is only about half that of other biotopes and, even if bacteria-feeding mixotrophs
are included, the proportion does not reach those of benthic and soil ciliates (Table 3.8). Possibly, this is caused
by competition of heterotrophic nanoflagellates and the general paucity of bacteria in the pelagial, as compared
to sediments. Terrestrial habitats are unique by the occurrence of obligate mycophages and a rather high propor-
tion of predators.
Table 3.8: Percentages offeeding strategies in main biotopes.
Biotope or Community Filter feeding Predacious Omnivorous Algal feeding Mixotrophic Mycophagous
Freshwater planktonl 4t.9 24.8 n.9 8.2 1.2 0
Euplanktonic species2 21.8 t3.6 16.4 24.5 23.7 0
Freshwater (benthic and pelagic)'l 41.6 t5.l 23.3 12.8 6.6 0
Soila 38.5 34.t 20.2 0 0 3.6
I
From Table 3.6.
2
F.orn Table 3.10.
3
From FOISSNER et al. (1991, 1992c, lgg4, lg95).
4
F.o.n FOISSNER (1998, Table 4).
I
FOISSNER (1981a) determined the mean body length of ciliates from freshwater (162 pm), soil (110 pm), and
marine sand (424 pm). We found a mean lengthr of Il4 pm for all species recorded from the plankton (Table
3.6), indicating that plankton ciliates are smaller then freshwater ciliates in general. The mean biomass of the
euplanktonic ciliates described in our book (Table 3.10) is 406 mg for 106 specimens. FOISSNER (1987a, 1998)
estimated 1076 mg for freshwater species in general, 241 mg for soil ciliates, and 872 mg for psammophilic cili-
ates. Plankton ciliates are thus smaller and lighter than benthic ciliates. This is an expected adaptation to the pe-
lagic life style because the sinking rate decreases the smaller the size and mass (NACHTIGALL 1999).Interest-
ingly, biomass of soil ciliates, but not mean length, is even half that of plankton ciliates. Obviously, spatial con-
straints exert a strong pressure on body width and mass.
3.6
Diversity
As mentioned above, about 180 euplanktonic species have been described worldwide (Table 3.6). However, we
are convinced that this is only a small portion of the species that actually exist, that is, most of the rare species
have very likely not yet been discovered. There are several indications for this assumption:
' A quarter of the I 18 species contained in our book has been described in the past two decades, mainly from
European lakes. Here, we describe seven new species and subspecies from a few small lakes of Austria and
Bavaria. And KRAINER (1991, 1995), KRAINER & FOISSNER (1990) and KRAINER & MÜLLER
(1995) discovered eight species in clean groundwater ponds of Styria, Austria. Finally, ESTEBAN's group
described nine new species from the oxic/anoxic boundary of a lake each in England, Spain, and Tasmania
(ESTEBAN et al. 1993a,b, 1999). Such a high number of new species strongly indicates that a considerable
portion ofthe diversity is still undiscovered.
' Data from Lake Baikal indicate the existence of an endemic ciliate fauna (GAJEWSKAJA 1933, OBOLKI-
NA 1995a). It seems reasonable to assume that a specific ciliate fauna exists also in other large and old lakes
I
W"ight"d mean from three length classes: <50pm (assumed mean 35pm; n = 133);50-200pm (assumed mean l00pm; n = 454);
>200 pm (assumed mean 300 pm; n = 92). A similar value (95 prm) is obtained with the real size of the I l8 species contained in the book.
55

General Ecology
of the world, especially in Lake Tanganyika, which has rarely been investigated by ciliate taxonomists. From
our observations on lakes in Austria and Germany, although being admittedly rather sparse, it seem possible
that endemic species occur even in small post-glacial lakes; an example is -+ Ophrydium eutrophicum, which
we have as yet found only in prealpine lakes near Salzburg although we checked dozens of populations from
other sites. On the other hand, several supposed endemits, such as -+ Marituja pelagica and possibly also -+
Liliimorpha viridis from Lake Baikal, have been rediscovered in German lakes.
Only ZACHARIAS, FAURE-FREMIET, GAJEWSKAJA, KRAINER, some Russian workers, and FOISS-
NER's group devoted a considerable amount of work to taxonomy of pelagic ciliates. Very likely, species
number would drastically increase with manpower.
Practically without exception, only Eurasian lakes have been investigated for ciliates, which means that the
lakes of three quarters of the world remain to be studied. Very likely, they contain a world of new species. An
example is -+ Stentor araucanus, which is frequent in South American lakes (FOISSNER & WÖLFL 1994).
Plankton ciliate communities show very pronounced seasonal changes. Most species are rare and present only
a few weeks (days?) o the year (Table 3.9). This decreases chances of collecting the entire diversity. Further-
more, such quickly changing, but not adverse biotopes tend to have high species numbers (intermediate dis-
turbance hypothesis).
In spite of our very limited knowledge, the data available suggest that diversity of euplanktonic ciliates is rather
small as compared to benthic freshwater and marine biotopes as well as to soil (Table 3.7). This is not only indi-
cated by the low number of euplanktonic species described so far, but also by the rather low number of species
contained in individual samples (Table 3.9). For instance, individual samples from mesotrophic rivers and pro-
ductive soils usually contain 40-60 ciliate species (e.g., FOISSNER 1987a, 1997, 1991a, FOISSNER et al.
1992a,b, HUL 1986), while the samples from the Höglwörther See usually contained 15-30 euplanktonic spe-
cies (Table 3.9). Likewise, the total number of euplanktonic species is between 50 (Höglwörther See, Table 3.9)
and about 100 (e.g., NEBRAT 1980) in lakes and reservoirs, while 20G400 benthic species are common in
mesosaprobic rivers (FOISSNER et al. 1992a, SCHMITZ 1986, BLATTERER pers. comm.). This is a ratio of
about 1:4. If we estimate that the total number of soil and benthic river ciliates is near 2000 (FOISSNER 1997b,
FINLAY et al. 1996a) each, then we can expect about 600 euplanktonic ciliates, or in other words, two thirds of
them are still undescribed.
As an example of diversity analysis, we summarize our data from the Höglwörther See, a small lake in southern
Bavaria, from which we analyzed 16 samples over a year (Table 3.9).
97 taxa were found, of which 81 could be identified to species level. This is quite a high number, as com-
pared to most receht species lists, indicating that identification is usually very incomplete. The unidentified
taxa contain at least two new species; three other new species discovered in this lake are described in this
book. Thus, five new species were discovered, demonstrating our ignorance about ciliate diversity.
About a quarter (48) of the euplanktonic ciliates described so far (roughly 180 species, Table 3.6) was found.
Most of these species are obviously very common and have been reported from many Eurasian lakes and res-
ervoirs; however, a considerable portion was new (5 taxa), has been discovered rather recently, or mentioned
rarely. A representative example are the halteriids: three species were found, namely -+ Halteria bifurcata
TAMAR, a rather recently described, doubtful (FOISSNER et al. 1991) species, now confirmed by
KRAINER (1995) and ourselves; -s Pelagohalteria citiftra (KAHL); and the green -+ P. viridis
(FROMENTEL). -+ Halteria grandinella did not occur, indicating that many of the numerous planktonic re-
cords are misidentifications !
We can confirm and extend the following literature knowledge (for review, see LAYBOURN-PARRY 1992):
(i) There was a distinct ciliate bloom in spring and a marked decrease during summer and winter, not only re-
garding abundance, but also species; (ii) Guests, that is, basically benthic species were common, but hardly
reached high abundances, except for some small scuticociliates, which became dominant during microaero-
56

General Ecology
bic/anaerobic periods; (iii) Constancy was very low. More than half of the species occurred at less than five
of the 16 sampling occasions, and only four species (--> Codonella cratera, -+ Coleps hirtus viridis, -+ Pela-
govorticella natans, -+ Tintinnidium pusillum) were present in 11 or more samples. Obviously, seasonal
changes are much more pronounced in the pelagial than in running waters (FOISSNER, unpublished) and soil
(FOISSNER et al. 1985), where a much higher percentage of species is constant. Very likely, the strong sea-
sonal changes in the pelagic community are related to (i) lake stratification, (ii) the seasonal occurrence of
predators, especially rotifers and crustaceans, and (iii) the highly varying food resources.
Epiplanktonic ciliates (those attached to pelagic organisms) are common and abundant and should thus stud-
ied in more detail in future.
Table 3.9: Ciliate species in a small, eutrophic lake (Höglwörther See) of southem Bavaria on 16 sampling occasions between 3 March 1997
and 2 February 1998.r
Sampling occasions
Taxa
Ca(t A§r Fftar -$P f< ,. NFtA< -. N=Ä N\ ÄL o-\J o- $o0 @ojl ( $oa n. a oNa C '\). Nfs -C -) ) z ( C.) ) N- t0o !)
\ CNA
t-l '\
Apsiktrata grac:ilis (PENARD, 1 922) + +
. Askenasia acrostomia KRAINER & FOISSNER, 1990 + + + + + +
o Askenasia volvor (trICHWALD, 1852) + + + + + + +
o Astylozoon Jaurei complex + + + +
o Balanion planctonicum (FOISSNER, OLEKSIV & MÜLLER,
+ + +
l 990)
Balanonema sapropelica FOISSNER, l97B +
o Belonophrya pelagica ANDRE , 1914 + + + + + + + +
Brachonel la spiralis (SMITH, lB97) + +
o Bursat"ia truncatella MÜLLER, lll3 +
o B ursaridium pseudobursat'ia (FAURE-FRE,MIET, I 924) + + + + +
o Bursellopsis nigricans mohili,s (WANG & NIE,, 1933) + +
o Bursellopsis pelagica FOISSNER, BE,RGER & SCHAUMBURG,
+ + + + + +
1999
C aenomorpha uni serialis LEVANDE,R, lB94 + + +
Cinetochilum mat'garitaceum (EHRENBERG,, I B3 I ) + + + +
o Codonella c'ratera (LEIDY, 1877) + + + + + + + + + + +
o Coleps elongatus EHRENBERG, 1831 + + + + +
o Coleps hirtus viridis EHRENBERG, 183l + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
Colpidium kleini FOISSNER, 1969 +
Cristigera phoen /r PENARD, 1922 + +
Ctedocrema acanthocryptum STOKES, 1 BB4 +
Cyr:Iidium glauc:oma MÜLLER, llI3 + +
D exiotricha tranquilla (KAHL, 1926) + + + + +
o Didinium chlorelligerum KAHL, 1935 +
o Dictinium nasurum (MÜLLER, 1773) +
o Epistylis anastatic'a (LINNAEUS , ll6l) +
o E,pisrylis geleii STILLER, I93 I + + +
o Epi.;tyli.s pt'or:umbens ZACHARIAS , l\9l + + +
o Episrylis pygntaeum (EHRENBERG, 1838) + + +
Euplotes patella (MÜLLEF., lll3) + + +
Frontonia angusta KAHL, l93l +
F rontonia leucas (EHRENBERG, I 833) + + + +
57

General Ecology
Sampling occasions
Taxa C! LO. <L N-tq< NL> \J' \z Nl cv CN- $äo oo oo a $q 0) ( NO Cn). NFPO z O() C- iJOo
Z A. - t - C\ O - LJ . -' l,
F ur gasonia hloc'hmanni FAURE-FREMIET, 196l +
o H alteria bif'urt:ata T AMAR, I 968 + + + + +
o Histiobalantium hodantic'um KRAINER & MÜLLER, 1995 + + + + + + + +
Hontalozootl vermiculare (STOKES, I 887) +
o Lagynopht'ya acun'tinata KAHL, 1935 + + +
Lagynus elegans (ENGELMANN, 1862) + + +
o Limnostrombidium viride (STEIN, I867) + + + + + + +
Lorodes magnus STOKES, I BB7 +
Lorodes striatus (ENGELMANN , 1862) + +
o Marituja pelagica GAJEVSKAJA, l92B + + + + + + +
o Mesodinium ac'arus STE,IN, 186l +
o Monodiniunt balhianii halhianii FABRE-DOMERGUE, IBBB + + + + + + +
o Monodinium halbianii rostratum (KAHL, 1926) +
o Monodinium c:hlorelligerum KRAINER, 1995 + + + +
o Paradileptus elepltantinns (SVEC, l1gl) +
P arame c ium aur e li a complex + +
Parantec'ium putrinum CLAPAnpnp & LACHMANN, I859 +
o P elagodileptus rrac'helioides (ZACHARIAS, 1 894) +
o Pelagohalteria c'irrifera (KAHL, 1932) + + + +
o Pelagohalteria viridis (FROMENTEL, 1876) + +
o Pelagolacrymaria moserae FOISSNER, BERGER & SCHAUM-
+ + + + +
BURG, 1999
o P elagostrontbidi um .fallax (ZACHARIAS, I 895) +
o Pelagostrombidium mirabile (PENARD, l9l6) + + + + +
o Pelagothrix chlorelligera F'OISSNER, BERGER & SCHAUM-
+ + + + + + +
BURG, 1999
o P elagovot'tic'ell.a natans (FAURE-FREMIET, I 924) + + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
Plac'us luc'iae (KAHL, 1926) +
Plagiopyla nasuta STEIN, 1860 + +
Pleuronenla coronatura KENT, 1881 +
o Rhahdoaslrenasia minina KRAINER & FOISSNER, 1990 + + +
o Rimostrombidium brac'hykineturr KRAINER, 1995 + + + + +
o Rimostromhidium hunrile (PENARD, 1922) + + + + +
o Rimostrombidium lacustris (FOISSNER, SKOGSTAD & PRATT,
+ + + + + + + + + +
I 988)
Spirostomum teres CLAPAnenE & LACHMANN, 1B5B + + + + +
Stentor c'oeruleus (PALLAS, 1166) +
Stentor roeselii EHRENBE,RG, I 835 +
Srrobilidium c'audatum (FROMENTEL, I 876) +
Tetrahymena rostrata (KAHL, 1926) +
o Tintinnidium pusillunz E,NTZ, 1909 + + + + + + + + + + + + + +
o Tt'ic'hodina domerguei ntegamic'r'onuc'leata DOGIEL , 1940 + + +
IJronenta nigricans (MÜLLER, I786) +
o Urotricha apsheronic'a ALEKPE,ROV, l9B4 + + + +
o IJrotricha castalia MUNOZ,TELLEZ & FERNÄX»EZ-
+ + + + + + +
GALIANO, I9B7
58

General Ecology
Sampling occasions
Taxa
Ct L\ Ar ) Ft A lr . \ Fft l,r ctrtA .i .- l. \a N=LtU \\A N=d or C- \ C ca -Or l sbo oo oo ( $A 0n). ( C cA cn ...) l\. Nt+ -( -)) z ( FJo l O N- to !
o (Jrotricha farcta CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN, I859 + + + + + +
o (J rotricha J'urc'ata SCHEWIAKOFF, 1892 + + + +
o (Jrotricha nrutthesi tt'istic:ha FOISSNER & PFISTER, 1997 +
o (Jrotricha pelagica KAHL, 1935 + +
o Urotric'ha venarrlx KAHL, 1935 + + + + +
o Vortic:ella aquadulcis complex + + + + + +
Vorticella campanula EHRENBERG, 183 I + +
V o rti c e lla c o nval I ar ia complex +
Unidentified taxa
Cyclidium sp. + + +
Cyc'lotric:hium sp. +
Deriotric'ha sp. +
o Deriotrichides sp.2 + +
Dexiotrichides'/ sp. +
Epakella sp. + +
Histiobalantium sp. +
Holophr))a cf . teres (EHRENBERG, 1833) +
M ic't'othorax sp. +
o Monodinium cf . armatum (PENARD, 1922) +
New gymnostome genus2 + + +
Orytric:ha sp. +
Scuticociliate + +
Trachelophyllum cf . apiculatum (PERTY, 1852) +
Urotric'ha sp. +
Vortic'ella attached to Synura +
Number of species 35 3B 2l 35 22 t2 l5 t1 23 l5 2l t7 4 t7 t4 9
Number of euplanktonic species 28 25 24 3l 2t 1t) l5 l1 13 t2 l3 t2 4 It) il B
Methods (L = live observation, P - protargol impregnation) LP LP LP LP LP L L LP LP L LP L L L L L
Total ciliate abundance (l = low, 2 -middle,3 = high) 2 J.-| 2 2 2 aJ I 1 2 2 2 2 I I I I
' The Höglwörther See is a small, eutrophic (average P,,,r 3l lrg lr) lake in southem Bavaria and fed by four streams from forests and pas-
tures. The sediment is muddy and ice-cover is from January to mid-February. The following data were kindly provided by Miss Georgia
BUCHMEIER (Salzburg University), who also took the ciliate samples. Location: 47'49'N, l2'50'E; catchment area:2.3 km2; sea-level:
532 m; surface area: 13.4 ha; coast line: 2 km; volume: 430 000 m3; maximum depth: 6.5 m; average depth: 3.2 m.
Samples were taken from the surface to the bottom at the deepest site of the lake with a Ruttner sampler and filtered through a 15 pm
plankton net. The individual samples were mixed to a composite, transported in a cooling box to Salzburg, and immediately investigated.
For protargol impregnation, which was performed only when there were many species and specimens, 100 ml of the sample were used.
2
Very likely a new species.
o Euplanktonic species.
59

Genererl Ecology
3.7
Ecological Characterization of the Species Described in this Book
The following Table should help with the interpretation of species lists. It briefly informs about important eco-
logical features ofthe I 18 plankton ciliates described in this book.
Table 3.10: Ecological characterization ofciliate species described in this book. A = algae (except diatoms, but including autotrophic flagel-
lates), B =bacteria, BE = benthic, C =ciliates, CY =cyanobacteria, D=diatoms, EP=eupelagic, ECP=epiplanktonic oncyanobacteria,
EPP=epiphytoplanktonic,EZB=epizoobenthic,EZP=epizooplanktonic,F=heterotrophicflagellates,he=holo-euryhaline,M=mixo-
trophic, that is, autotrophic (due to symbiotic algae or sequestered chloroplasts) and heterotrophic, mpe = meso- to poly-euryhaline, mps =
meso- to poly-stenohaline, O = omnivorous (feeds on autotrophic and heterotrophic protists, occasionally even on small metazoans), oe =
oligo-euryhaline, orrl€ = oligo- to meso-euryhaline, oms = oligo- to meso-stenohaline, os = oligo-stenohaline, pe = poly-euryhaline, ps =
poly-stenohaline, p = pelagic, pf, = predacious (feeds on protozoa, mostly ciliates, some species even ingest small metazoans), R = rotifers,
S = terrestrial (mostly wetland) soils.
Species Biomass Main food Sal inity occurrence3 Page
(mg) of tolerance2
106 ind.l
Ac'tinobolina raclians (STEIN, I 867) STRAND, l92B 125 PR oe? P, BE, S tt2
Actinoholina smal/i HOLT, LYNN & CORLISS, l9l3 ll M, PR OS P, BE, 115
Ac'tinobolina vora"r (WENRICH, 1929) KAHL, 1930 250 PR oms? E,P, S 118
Ac'tinoholina wenric'hii WANG & NIE,, 1933 90 M, PR OS EP? t23
Askenasia ac:rostomia KRAINER & FOISSNER, 1990 32 A,C OS EP l4B
Askenasia chlorelligera KRAINER & FOISSNER, 1990 20 M OS EP l5l
Askenasia volvor (EICHWALD, lB52) KAHL, 1930 35 A,D oe? P, BE, 154
Asty lozoon .fallax ENGELMANN, 1862 30 B OS EP 453
A s ty I o z o o n .faur ei complex 50 B oms? trP 455
Balanion planc'tonic'um (FOISSNER, OLEKSIV & MÜLLE,R, 0.3-3.6 A,B OS EP 363
1990) FOISSNE,R, BERGER & KOHMANN, 1994
Balantidion pellucidunt EBERHARD, 1862 60 o OS EP 252
Belonophrya pelagica ANDRE, 19l4 il PR OS EP t24
B ursaridium ps e udobursat'ia (tr AlJnp-f'nnMIET, 1924) KAHL, 342 A OS EP t09
1921
Bursellopsis nigric'ans mohilis (WANG & NlE, 1933) FOISSNER, 900 R OS EP 381
BERGER & SCHAUMBURG, 1999
Bursellopsis nigricans nigricans (LAUTERBORN, 1894) FOISS- 350 A, F' OS EP 383
NE,R, BE,RGER & SCHAUMBURG, 1999
Bursellopsis pelagica FOISSNER, BERGER & SCHAUMBURG, 2000 o OS EP 375
1999
Bursellopsis spuntosa (SCHMIDT, 1920) CORLISS, 1960 I 8000 M,O OS EP Ja'7I/L\
Bursellopsis tt'urtt'ata (KAHL, I 921) CORLISS, 1960 150 A OS E,P'? 391
Codonella cratet"rz (LEIDY , lSll) IMHOF', 1BB5 20 D, A (O?) oe EP 6tl
Coleps elongatus' EHRENBERG, I 83l 45 o OS P. BE 292
Coleps hirrus hirtus (MÜLLER, l786) NITZSCH, l\2l 2l o oms (he?) P, BE, 213
Coleps hirrus viridis EHRENBERG, 183 1 2t M,O OS P, BE, 284
Coleps nolandi KAHL, 1930 t6 o he P, BE, 291
Coleps spetai FOISSNER, l9B4 60 M,O OS EP 288
Colpoda steinii MAUPAS,, lBB3 4 B ome P, BE,, S tt4
Cyclorrichium viride GAJEWSKAJA, 1933 500 M,O OS EP 205
Cyrtolophosis mltcicola STOKES, 1B85 2 B he? P, BE,, S ltB
Didiniunt chlorelli gerum KAHL, I 935 110 M, PR? OS EP t67
Didinium nasurum (MÜLLEF., l7l3) STEIN, 1859 s00 PR oe? P, BE, tll
Disematostoma buetschlii LAUTERBORN, I 894 400 M,A,B OS E,P 409
60

General Ecology
Species B iomass Mair-r food Salinity Occurre,-,a"3 Page
(mg) of tolerance2
l0t' ind. I
Discntutostoma tctt'uedrit'unt (FAURE-FREMIET, I 924) KAHL, 150 M.D OS EP 414
r93 r
E piccrt'cltcsirutt 1tccti rtutunr (ZACHARIAS, I 897) FOISSNER. 60 B.A he'l EP 50tt
BERGER & SCHAUMBURG, I9L)9
Epistrlis uttustcrticu (LINNAEUS, I767) EHRENBERG, I830 60 B OS EZP 515
Episrt'lis digiralis (LINNAEUS, lJ 58) EHRENBERG, 1 830 30 B OS EZP. EZB 523
E pi.stl' lis procrttrt ltc tts ZACHARIAS, I ti97 4o B.F oe'J EP 521
E,pisrvlis pvgntac urr (E,HRENBERG, IU3tt) FOISSNE,R, BE,RGER 20 B ome'J EZP 535
& SCHAUMBTJRG. I999
Frontonia leucas (EHRENBE,RG, lB33) E,HRENBE,RG, I838 210 o oe P. BE 416
G a.j cv',s l;u.j op ltry'u nte Ios i t'aa (G AJEWSKAJA, 1933) MATTHE,S, r50 F?, C'/ OS EPP 125
r 988
ll u I tcriu bi,/'ru't'utu T ÄMAR, I 96ti 1 M,B OS P, BE, 554
Hultcriu gt'unrlincttu (MÜLLER, 1713) DUJARDIN. ltl4l t4 B,A hc'J P. BE 559
Httstatcllu rurliuti,r ERLANGER. I 890 30 B oe'/ EP 460
Hi.stiobaluntirutr borlamicrrrr KRAINER & MULLER. I995 34 A,B OS EP 424
l-l yltotrit'hidiunt cortit'unt ILOWAISKY, l92l 150 o otns'? E,I) 671
Lu,q.t'ttrt1t It t't'u ut' rtttti ttutu KAHL. I 935 25 A OS EP 258
Lcpidotracltcloltlty,llunr linearc (LEPSI, 1960) FOISSNER , 1994 500 PRorO OS E,I) 262
Li I i i ntorltltu t'it'idrs GAJEVSKAJA, 1928 4o M OS EI) t64
Lintrtostt'ontltitliunt peIugicunt (KAHL, 1932) KRAINER, 1 995 30 A OS EI) 574
Linrrtostt'ontbitliunr vit'itlc (STEIN, I 867) KRAINE,R, I 995 50 M,D,A,B oe EP 571
Linostontcllu vot'ticclla (EHRENBERG, 1833) AESCHT in r 000 o oe'l EP 655
FOISSNER. BERGER & SCHAUMBURG. 1999
Longitricltu prtt'toruci (DRAGESCO, IFTODE & FRYD- 65 A OS EP 368
VERSAVE,L, 1914) FOISSNER & PFISTER, 1997
Muritu.ju pclagicu GAJEVSKAJA, I 928 190 D, CY, A o:,i EP 431
(o)
Mcnrbrunitola tuntari FOISSNE,R, BE,RGER & SCHAUMBURC, 50 A OS EP 626
1999
M c,socli rti rtnt u(ut'us STEIN. I tt67 1.5 o he P. BE r35
Mcsotlirtirtnt pulc.u (CLAPAnEnp & LACHMANN, 1859) STE,IN, 5 o I-re P. BE r39
r 867
Monodirtiunr alvcolatunt (KAHL, 1930) FOISSNE,R, BERGER & 4o A,F oe'/ EP l Ttt
SCHAUMBURG, 1999
M onodi tri ttnt bulbiutti i bulbiunir FABRE-DOMERGUE. I Bt38 55 PR he'l P. BE. S 182
M o rt orl i n i rutr bu I b i u n i i I t rcv i 1t rt t lto st' i.v FOTSS N E,R, BERGER & -1 1a -1 C OS EP r90
SCHAUMBURG,1999
M onotli ttittrtt ltuIl"tiurti i rostratttnr (KAHL, 1926) FOISSNER, 50 / oe'J EP r96
BERGER & SCHAUMBURG. 1999
Monodirtiunt chlorclligerunt KRAINER, I995 30 M,A,F OS EP l9tt
M onodi tti unt pct'r'i u'i DELPHY, 1925 45 C OS EP 202
M ucopltrva pelugica GAJEVSKAJA. 1928 n0 c'/ OS EP 123
Obcrn'untia aurca (EHRENBERG, 1833) F'OISSNE,R, 1987 500 CY he'/ P. BE 700
Opltrydiunt cutt'olthicunt FOISSNE,R, I 979 215 M.B OS P. BE 540
Ophrvdiurn nauntartni PEJLER , 1962 5 M.B OS EP 55r
Ophrycliutlt t'ersarite (MÜLLER, 1786) EHRENBE,RG, I830 28t) M,B,A he'/ P. BE 5r13
Opisthortcctu hcnnc guvi FAURp-n'npn4IET, I 906 r 000 B,F OS P. BE 461
Pararlileptus elcphantinus (SVEC, 1897) KAHL, 193 I I 000 o OS EP 221
Pclagocli lcprus tt'ucltelioitles (ZACHARIAS, I 894) F'OISSNER, 4500 M.O OS EP 232
BE,RGER & SCHAUMBURG. 1999
6t

General Ecology
Species Biomass Main food Salinity Occurrera"3 Page
(mg) of tolerance2
106 ind. I
P ela gohalreria cirrifera (KAHL, 1932) FOISSNER, SKOGSTAD t4 A OS EP s66
& PRATT, I9BB
P elagohalreria viridis (FROMENTEL, I 876) F'OISSNER, SKOG- 7 M,B,A oe EP s69
STAD & PRATT, 1988
Pelagolacrymaria moserae FOISSNER, BE,RGER & SCHAUM- 4l C OS E,P 265
BURG, 1999
Pelagosrrontbidium fallax (ZACHARIAS, I 895) KRAINER, 1991 120 M, B, CY, OS EP s85
D.A
Pelagosrromhidium mirabile (PENARD, 1916) KRAINER, 1991 30 M,A oms? EP s90
Pelagothrir chlot'elligera F'OISSNER, BERGER & SCHAUM- 21 M OS E,P 395
BURG, 1999
Pelagothrix plancticola FOISSNER, BERGER & SCHAUM- 45 M,O OS EP 401
BURG, 1999
P ela gort'i chidiunt .faurei (TUF'FRAU, l9l 2) JANKOWSKI, 191 B 2500 ? OS EP 683
Pelagovasicola c'irtc'tum (VOIGT, 1901) JANKOWSKI, 1980 250 o OS EP 2t3
P ela govc»'tic'e lla ntayeri (FAURE-FREMIET, I 924) 50 B OS EP 480
JANKOWSKI, 1980
P ela govortic'e lla natans (FAURE-FREMIET, I 924) 90 B,A oe? EP 482
JANKOWSKI, 1985
Phascolodon vorticella STEIN, 1859 75 A, DI, CY, oe EP 693
B
Pseudohaploc'aulus inJravacuolatus FOISSNER & BROZEK, 1996 30 A OS ECP 501
P seudostrombidium planctontic'uLrz HORVÄTH, 1933 110 F,D,A OS EP 685
Rhabdoaskenasia minima KRAINER & F'OISSNER, 1990 l0 ? OS EP 161
Rimostrombidiun't armeniensis (ZHARIKOV, I987) FOISSNER, 100 ? OS EP s95
BERGER & SCHAUMBURG, 1999
Rimostrombidium brachylcinetunz KRAINER, 1 995 Ja A, B, CY OS EP 606
Rimosrromhidium humile (PENARD,, 1922) PETZ & FOISSNER, 4 D oms? P, BE, 6l I
t992
Rimostt'ombidium hyal iruzrr (MIRABDULLAE,V, 1985) PETZ &. 5 ? (4, B, OS EP 609
F'OISSNER, 1992 CY)
Rimostronthidium lac'ustris (FOISSNER, SKOGSTAD & PRATT, 90 A OS EP 596
I9BB) PETZ & FOISSNER, 1992
Rimostrombid ium velor (F'AURE-FREMIET, 1 924) 50 M,A ome? EP 604
JANKOWSKI , I9]B
Spiretella planctic:ola (GELEI, 1933) BORROR, l9l2 400 A, F' OS EP 688
Staurophrya e legans ZACHARIAS, 1893 I l0 C oe E,P 121
Stentor amethystinus LEIDY, l8B0 4000 B,A,D OS EP 664
Stentor arau('dtlzzs FOISSNER & WÖLFL, 1994 1200 A,B OS EP 6tl
Stokesia vernalis WENRICH. 1929 400 M,B,A,D OS EP 439
Teuthophrys tt'isulca aJi'ic'ana DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO- I 000 R oms EP 238
KERNEIS, I986
Teuthophrys trisulca trisulc:a CHATTON & DE BEAUCHAMP, 1 000 M,R OITIS EP 238
1923
TintinnidiLtm ephemeridunr HILLIARD, I 968 s0 ? OS EP 636
Tintinnidiunt flut,iatile (STEIN, 1863) KENT, I BB I 50 A,D oe EP 631
Tintinnidiunt pusillum ENTZ, 1909 40 A,D,B oms? EP 642
Tintinnopsis cylindrata KOFOID & CAMPBELL, 1929 20 A OS EP 648
Tric'hodina pediculus EHRENBERG, I 83I BO B4 he? Ps 412
Urotricha agilis (STOKES, l886) KAHL, 1930 0.5 B,F OS P, BE 348
U rotric'ha apsherortic'a ALEKPEROV, l9B4 35 o OS E,P 302

General Ecology
Species B iomass Main food Salinity occurrena"3 Page
(mg) of tolerance2
106 ind.l
IJ r o t r i c h a t' a s I a I ia MU I§O Z, TELLEZ & FERNÄ NDEZ- t2 A,F OS EP 335
GALIANO, I9B]
[Jrorricha.farua CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN, I859 5 B,A,F oms? P, BE, 35 l
U rorrit' ha f'urc'ata SCHEWIAKOFF, 1892 3-4 B,A OS E,P 344
Urorriclta globosa SCHEWIAKOFF, I 892 1 B,A he? EP 357
Urotric'ha ntatthesi matthesi KRAINER, 1995 t1 ? OS EP 340
l.Jrotricha ntatthesi tristiclza FOISSNER & PFISTER, 1997 IB A,D,F OS EP 342
Urott'icha pelagica KAHL, 1935 35 B,D oe EP 309
Urotric'ha platystoma STOKES, I B86 l5 PR oe (he?) P, BE, 359
U rotricha pseudof'urc:ata KRAINER, 1 995 2 ? OS EP 341
Urotricha simonsbergeri FOISSNER, BE,RGER & SCHAUM- 350 o OS EP 324
BURG, 1999
U rotricha vctlida SONG & WILBERT, 1989 BO ? OS EP? 313
Urotricha venatrlr KAHL, 1935 220 R OS EP 315
V ortic e lla aquadul cis complex l5 B he? BE, EPP,EZP 486
Vorticella c:hlorellata STILLER, I 940 25 M,B OS ECP 491
Vortic'ella vernalis STOKES, 1BB7 40 A,B OS E,PP, EZP,BE, 494
Wet mass; I pmr = I pg, that is, specific gravity of protoplasm is 1.0 (FINLAY 1982).
For classification see Table 3. I 1. Data are often highly questionable and thus are then marked with a "?". Very few limnetic ciliates occur
in truly marine environments although many species tolerate high salinity. Many freshwater species occur in saline estuaries ltogether with
some marine species, however, few marine ciliates occur in strongly saline inland waters.
With few exceptions (e.g. Cyrtolophosis mucicola), all species contained in this list prefer the pelagial. However, some (e.g. Coleps spp.,
Halteria spp.) live in the pelagial and benthal as well; possibly, benthic occurrence is a slightly overemphasized (e.g. Aoinobolina spp.) in
the compilation because even single and not entirely reliable records were considered.
Ingests also fish epidermal cells, cnidocysts and food residues of Hydra.
Epizoic on a wide range of hosts (hydrozoans, bryozoans, amphibian larvae, fish); detached specimens survive for some time and may
thus be found in the pelagial.
Table 3.11: Salinity terminology (after ALBRECHT 1984). Cl = chloride (-g l'), S = salinity (Voo).
CI 0-400 400-2000 2000-5000 5000-17000 I >17000
S 0-1 t-4 4-10 10-30 >30
holo-euryhaline
oligostenohaline meso- to poly-euryhaline
oligo- to meso-stenohaline poly-euryhaline
oligo-euryhaline meso- to poly-stenohaline
oligo- to meso-euryhaline poly-stenohaline
63



4 IDENTIFICATION, DESCRIPTION AND ECOLOGY OF SPECIES
4.L Key to Main Groups and Species
The key contains all species described in the book plus some rare and benthic forms not treated in detail. It is
easy to use and most supraspecific taxa are keyed out at least two times. Furthermore, with few exceptions, all
characters asked can be easily recognized at low magnification (about x100). Plates X-XIV ofthe general key
are designed to identify specimens from protargol slides, in which about 70 %o of the taxa can be identified
to at least genus level; species identification frequently needs additional information from live specimens. All
sizes refer to live specimens, which usually shrink by lC-:20 7o in protargol preparations.
Consider that you may find many more species in the samples when they are from small ponds, the littoral, or
microaerobiclanaerobic hypolimnions (Table 3.6). Maay of these are basically benthic or periphytic and can be
determined with the keys by FOISSNER et al. (1995) and FOISSNER & BERGER (1996). Furthermore, you
will frequently find not yet described species and genera.
Check all species identifications against the detailed descriptions in the systematic sec-
tion. Use bright field or interference contrast, not phase contrast microscopy, for live
observation.
Gengfal kgy I
1g"n"rrl key plates l-lX are for live identification)
live observation protargol impregnation
at < x100 Genera! key X
(p-74)
conspicuous ciliary corona (arrow) at anterior end
absent, not recognizable present
or inconspicuous
General key ll
contractile; somatic cilia
no; yes, form + no; sparse yes; lacking no; numerous
M
tufts in M
mid-body
,l/-/\
:\\\l
{§
\\/ t
\/ lorica Wffi
\,l J
7
W
contracted
macronucleus
Oligotrichida Peritrichia Heterotrichida
(p. 103) (p. e5) or Hypotrichia
(p. 106)
65

Key to Main Groups and Species
1 Use vital organisms only! Note that many plankton
General key ll
ciliates become rapidly morbid and globular after
sampling and, especially, when transferred to the
slide! lf in doubt, continue with "no".
conicall
no or unknown
yes
contracted
contractile
vacuole
I
macro-
nucleus
ßY
Oligotrichida Peritrichia
(p. 103) (p e5)
barrel-shaped or ellrpsoidall
no or unknown yes
tintinnid which
Ieft lorica
Oligotrichida
I
(p 103) Prostomatida Gymnostomatea
(p ee) (p. eo)
slenderl, length : width > 5:1
no or unknown yes
General key Ill
Le p i d ot rac h e I o p h y I I u m Pelagodileptus Lagynophrya Ophrydium
lineare trachelioides acuminata Peritrichia I, Il
pm pm
300-500 pm 230-800 70-95 (p. 95, 96)
(p.232)
(p.262) (p. 258)

Key to Main Groups and Species
1 Use vital organisms only! Note that many plankton
General key lll ciliates become rapidly morbid and globular after
sampling and, especially, when transferred to the
slide! lf in doubt, continue with "no".
from General key ll
proboscis or proboscis-like elongation (arrow)'
no or unknown yes
\
macro-
nucleus
Paradileptus Pelagodileptus Teuthophrys Monodinium/Didinium
elephantinus trachelioides trisulca Gymnostomatea lll, V
pm
1 00-450 pm 230-800 1 50-300 pm (p. 92, 93)
(p.232)
(p.221) (p. 238)
2 macronuclear - Lepidotrachelophyll um
nodules lineare
300-500 prm
(p.262)
Lagynophrya
Pelagolacrymaria acuminata
Gymnostomatea I 70-95 pm
(p eo) (p. 258)
shape bizarre (with spines, processes, cavities ...)1
no or unknown yes
Special key
stalk and/or attached to plankton organisms (p. 7e)
no or unknown Vt E--S
epibiontic on algae,
General key IV epizoic especially diatoms
zffi
.-
tentacles
rW)
MUCOUS
lorica
euplanktonic attached to
l^D debris
@
Peritrichia Gajewskajophrya Cyrtolophosrs
(p e5) melosirae mucicola
50-90 pm 20-40 pm
(p.725) (p.718)

Key to Main Groups and Species
1 Usually, tentacles are retractile rods with
General key lV a small distal knob, i. e. are widest at the
anterior end. Cilia, cirri (= bundle of cilia),
adoral membranelles, and spines gradually
from General key lll narrow to the distal end, i. e. are widest at
the posterior (proximal) end (see figures)
body with spines
absent or not present
recognizable
Coleps
Prostomatida
I
(p ee)
Hastatella radians
40-60 pm
(p. a60)
tentaclesl
absent or not present macronucleus
recognizable
Suctoria
(p. 107)
Actinobolina or - 2 tentacles
Belonophrya
Gymnostomatea I!
tentacles (p e1)
mucous lorica
absent or unknown present attached to
debris
Ophrydium versatile or tintinnids Cyrtolophosrs
O. eutrophicum Oligotrichida mucicola
I
Peritrichia I (p. 103) 20-40 Um
(p. e5) (p.718)
large (>200 pm)
yes
Actinobolina/
Special key I!
Belonophrya
(p. Bo) with extended
tentacles
no yes
V
General key Special key lll
(p 81)

Key to Main Groups and Species
1 See also the less common specie s Hastatella
General key V radians (Peritrichia l, p. 95) , Histiobalantium bo-
damicum (Hymenostomata, p. 94), and Spire-
from General key lV tella plancticola (Hypotrichia, p. 106)
colonial
or -+SiI;ff'P,e
no or unknown Epistylis yes Ophrydium §r;s...ir;:ffi
Epicarchesium Peritrichia l, ll § E"i; :ii .i; '%., '.' .. ..: ;: ,-: :" :'1': 1i ',, .: .i: f* ; . i ; :f:: i.i fI.: .§ .i1.,* -§i
Peritrichia ll, lV (p. 95, 96)
(p. 96, 98)
I
1-1 5 cm
conspicuously coloured (including zoochlorellae bearing sized, green
species) or dark (observe with bright field) globules
no or unknown yes
ial key lV
t. 82)
conspicuously (more than 50 %) contractile usually only fully
(touch with a needle or a mounted eyelash) contracted specimens
are found in the
samples!
/
no or unknown
contracts and
extends very
slowly
contractile
/1 / macro-
nucleus
Lepidotrachelo-
phyllum lineare
peritrichs with
stalk muscle 300-500 prm
Peritrichia ll, lll (p.262) Stentor
(p. 96,97) Heterotrichida
movement (p. 106, 662)
different or unknown fast-rotating extremely fast,
General key Vl and/or jumping, straight or zigzag
ü
u rotrichs
Prostomatida ll-lV \./
Didiniuml
Monodinium
Gymnostoma-
tea lll, V
Limnostrombidium, (p. 92, 93)
Pelagostrombidium or
H a I te r i a/P e I a g o h a I te r i a Askenasia or Mesodinium Rimostrombidium
Oligotrichida ll Gymnostomatea ll, lll Oligotrichida ll, lll
(p. 104) (p. 91 , 92, 134) (p. 104, 105)

Key to Main Groups and Species
General key Vl 1 Discrimination of cilia and cirri (=
several adhering cilia forming fairly
thick bundles): if you see cilia at a
from General key V magnification of x100-400, that is,
without oil immersion, then these are
very likely cirri!
conspicuous ciliary girdles
absent or unknown present
Special key Xll
(p
Be)
denticle disc on posterior end
absent or unknown \/ \/ pfeSent
. r
rrichodina
r;ftr J rH,,)=rr,
Peritrichiat
zR ,i'-o!s (p.95)
cytoplasm with ingested filamentous cyanobacteria
no or unknown yes
Obertrumia aurea
120-250 pm
(p. 700)
I
do you see "cilia" (cirril; arrow) on body at a magnification of x100 colou rf ull
no or unknown yes
To recognize the
following characters,
specimens must be
slightly squeezed
(flattened) and studied
with a magnification of
at least x250
Halteria/ Askenasia/ Mesodinium
Pelagohalteria Rhabdoaskenasia Gymnostomatea ll
Hypotrichia Oligotrichida ll Gymnostomatea lll (p e1)
(p. 106) (p 104) (p. e2)
macronucleus
globular, C-shaped, J-shaped, vermiform,
ellipsoidal or moniliforffi, or composed of 2 nodules
reniform Special key IX
(p 87)
rod (extrusome) fringe or conspicuous bundles of extrusomes
extrusomes (observe at x400 and with bright field)
absent or unknown present
General key VII Special key Xl
(p
Be)

Key to Main Groups and Species
General key Vll
from General key Vl
mouth (use magnification 2 x250)
with distinct funnel (F) in large cavity at base of a different
composed of slender rods proboscis General key Vlll
(arrow)
Phascolodon Obertrumia Prostomatida
vorticella aurea (p. ee)
60-90 rn 120-250 pm
U
(p. 6e3) (p. 700)
macronucleus (arrow)
t
2 nodules reniform or globular moniliform
ellipsoidal
Pelagotrichidium Bursaridium Bursellopsis Linostomella
faurei pseudobursaria Prostomatida lV vorticella
about 280 pm 80-200 pm (p. 102) about 170 Um
(p. 683) (p. 70e) (p. 655)
Paradileptus Pelagodileptus Teuthophrys trisulca
elephantinus trachelioides 50-300 pm
1
1 00-450 pm 230-800 pm (p. 238)
(p,221) (p.232)

Key to Main Groups and Species
1 Discrimination of cilia and cirri (=
General key Vlll several adhering cilia forming fairly
thick bundles): if you see cilia at a
magnification of x100-400, that is,
from General key Vll without oil immersion, then these
are very likely cirri!
oral ciliature
conspicuous, that is, tufts of cilia
(adoral membranelles or adoral
zone of membranelles) at
anterior and/or Iatera! margin
(easily recognizable at a
magnification of ) x100) >40 pm <40 pm (10-50 pm)
General Special key III
do you see "cilia" (cirri,) on body (p 81)
at a magnification of x100
adoral zone of
membranelles
complete adoral zone of strongly
reduced or
Iacking
Hypotrichia
(p. 106)
Heterotrichida
(p. 106)
body contractility; oral ciliature
distinct, especially under absent; distinct ciliary plates
slight coverglass pressure;
continuous membrane
somatic
adoral ciliary spiral
body
macro- stalk
nucleus contractile
tintin n id
pellicle with contracted which left
f ine Peritrichia attention, do not confuse Oligotrichida lorica
transverse (p. e5) with Didinium/Monodinium
striation (use Gymnostomatea lll, V (p. 103)
> x400)
(p. 92, 93)
72

Key to Main Groups and Species
General key IX
from General key Vlll
anterior end
with distinct (oral) cone, different
bulge, or head (arrow)
shape; mouth
cylind roid, barrel-shaped,
or globular; apical
l,
Balantidion Actinobolina/ Prostomatida
Belonophrya (p. ee)
Gymnostomatea l, ll
Gymnostomatea (p. 90, 91)
(p. eo)
reniform, that is, one side cap-shaped, obconical,
convex, the other concave lemon-shaped, obovoid,
with indentation at oral calyx-shaped; slightly to distinctly
opening; supapical supapical
.fr
{t r vat ie ära wr -A ( ,,t (D
E
{ §tr /
f re"*t ventra_ffi***;Y;
L'ffi view
f\-"f #
\'wl 1 \ LrJ
\*.,/ "/
Colpoda steinii
0-60 pm
1
(p.714)
u,,ka,a
.
(p. 94)

Key to Main Groups and Species
Gengfal key X (g"n"ral key plates x-lv are for identification of
protargol-i m pregnated speci mens)
from General key I (p. 65)
adoral zone of membranelles (AM) =
serially arranged stacks of oral cilia
absent present
cirri = patches of basal bodies
present absent
somatic ciliature
+ strongly reduced
(peritrichs, which also lack somatic ciliature, do not
have an adoral zone of mebranelles, but long, spirally
arranged oral basal body [ciliary] rows)
-ff_t),,/,
Hypotrichia complete 'Zr/ffi
(p. 106) t
somatic basal body rows
.,AM"
somatic basal
body rows (not
illustrated in
Bursaridium Bursaridiuml)
pseudobursaria
in life 80-200 pm
macron ucleus
(p. 70e)
Heterotrichida Oligotrichida
(p
106) (p. 103)
macronucleus
globular, ellipsoidal, C-shaped, J-shaped, vermiforffi
,
reniform, or not clearly moniliforffi, or composed of 2 nodules
recognizable Special key IX
General key XI (p 87)

Key to Main Groups and Species
General key Xl
from General
50-200 pm >200 pm <50 pm
Special key ll Special key lll
(p. Bo) (p 81)
different with proboscis or with stalk with
proboscis-l ike elongation Peritrichia II{V conspicuous
General key lll, first (p. e6-e8) spines
question
(p. 67)
Hastatella radians
in life 40-60 pm
colonial
(p. a60)
no or unknown yes (zooids usually globular in preparations)
I
Epistylis
procumbens
(p.527)
euplanktonic
epiplanktonic
Epistylis spp.
Epicarchesium
pectinatum Peritrichia IV
(p. 508) \ (p. eB)
epiplanktonic
\
noor unknown yes
Gajewskajophrya
Peritrichia
melosirae
(p. 95)
50-90 pm
(p.725)
zoochlore!!ae
absent or unknown present
General key Xll Special key V
(p. 83)
Differentiation from ingested algal food:
usually numerous, of same size and
morphology, and not in vacuoles; 4-6 pm
across with distinct membrane and dark
central or acentral globule

Key to Main Groups and Species
General key Xll
from General key Xl
oral apparatus (OA)
apical
subapical
General key Xlll
dorsal side (arrow) almost without basal bodies
P h ascol od o n vo rti cel la present Iacking
in life 60-90 pm
(p. 6e3)
OA
q
Obertrumia aurea
in life 120-250 pm
(p. 700)
Teuthophrys,
Paradilepfus or
Pelagodilepfus
Gymnostomatea
I
(p eo)
body length
>40 pm
tt
.3tt
trt
Cyrtolophosis Colpoda steinii
mucicola in life 10-60 Um, usually Hymenostomata
in life 20-40 Um 20-40 pm (p. e4)
(p.718) (p.714)

Key to Main Groups and Species
General key Xlll
AO = adoral organelles (=
brosse), CA = cäudäl cilia,
EP = excretory pore of
from General key Xll
contractile vacuole
oral ciliary pattern
different basal body (ciliary) spiral
(arrow) extending from
anterior pole to cell centre
somatic basal body (ciliary) girdle(s) - (arrow) Peritrichia
(p. e5)
processes present
_.
\
I !i r'l i
dorsal
brush
rdt(«t((
+
unciliated
Mesodinium As ke n as i a/R h ab d oas ke n as i a Didinium/Monodinium
Gymnostomatea ll Gymnostomatea lll Gymnostomatea !ll, V
(p. e1) (p e2) (p. 92, 93)
Cyclotrichium
Gymnostomatea lV /'7
./ (p.93)
-+-r
=>
+
Pelagovasicola
cinctum -t7
in life 50-1 B0 pm
posterior
(p. 21 3)
pole area long
oral
different without basal bodies, except f laps
for one (zero in Longitricha) to
General key XIV
many caudal cilia (body
globular)
. o . Urotricha,Longitricha
' . '.'.., ,'.' .'. Prostomatida ll-lV
' . '.' '
' j' -{Ia. 'r.'.r--'.'. . ( \p. 100-102)
'
Balanion Bursellopsis
planctonicum Prostomatida lV
in life 10-22 pm (p 102)
(p. 363)

Key to Main Groups and Species
General key XIV AO = adoral organelles (=
brosse), DB = dorsal brush
from General key Xlll
head and
trunk with
absent present spiralized
ciliary rows
ciliary
girdle
unciliated
Didinium/Monodinium Lagynophrya acuminata Pelagolacrymaria
Gymnostomatea lll, V in life 70-95 pm Gymnostomatea I
(p. 92, 93) (p. 258) (p. eo)
basal bodies very
irregularly spaced within
tentacles
ciliary rows; tentacles
no; absent yes; present
Acti n o b o I i n a/B e I o n o p h rya
Gymnostomatea ll
(p. e1)
narrowly spaced
basal bodies
very regularly
arranged basal
bodies
Coleps Pelagothrix Balantidion pel lucidum
Prostomatida I Prostomatida I in life 70-100 pm
(p. ee) (p. ee) (p.252)

Key to Main Groups and Species
SpeGial key I 1 Species not treated in detail!
(species with bizane shape)
from General key lll (p. 67)
proboscis
-
ciliary
girdle(s)
Paradileptus Didinium/Monodinium Cycl otri ch i u m h u m i I i s1 Pelagolacrymaria
elephantinus Gymnostomatea lll, V 25 x 56 pm Gymnostomatea I
'l 00-450 pm (p. 92, 93) (p. eo)
(p.221)
Teuthophrys trisulca Liliimorpha viridis Hastatella radians Trichodina
150-300 pm diameter 110 Pm 40-60 pm Peritrichia I
(p. 238) (P, 164) (p a60) (p. e5)
adoral zone of
anterior end trilobate
membranelles lateral view
Codonella cratera Sfenos emella lacustrisl Stokesia vernalis D i sematosto m a tetraed ri c u m
50-70 pm about 70 Pm 100-220 pm 1 00-140 pm
Iorica 43-63 pm lorica 40-48 Pm (p. aSe) (p. 414)
617)
(p. (p. 618)
adoral zone of
membranelles ,3:,:ilffi'"
L1-y\
Spiretella plancticola Hypotrichidium conicum Phascolodon vorticel la B u rsari d i u m pseud obu rsari a
95-1 60 pm 90-1 20 pm 60-90 pm 80-200 pm
(p. 688) (p.677) (p. 6e3) (p. 70e)

Key to Main Groups and Species
SpeCial key ll u"'o"J"ii'ä:,rllto u'r
thrs" [usuaily >2oo pm] species)
probosci
\
Lep i d otrac h e I o phy I I u m Parad i leptus elephanti n us Pelagodileptus Teuthophrys trisulca
lineare 1 00-450 pm trachelioides 1 50-300 pm
300-500 pm (p.221) 230-800 pm (p 238)
262) (p.232)
{0 globular
\
colonies up
to 15,cm! .,
-,r§*B.We^
§i--, ,it',),i
Sr:ii:*rr!; E
F%;.li:ir',:;#[:.1f:.f11i:§,i:i*-$-*r
Ophrydium versatile or O. eutrophicum large Bursellopsrs spp. Frontonia leucas
extended 250'-4OO prm long 1 30-800 pm 120-600 pm
Peritrichia I (p. 100, 102) (p. a1o)
(p. e5)
adoral zone of
membranelles
conspicuous
oral basket
colourf ull
Obertrumia aurea Pel agotric h i d i u m fau rei Li n ostomel I a vorti cel I a
120-250 Um about 280 pm 100-21 0 pm
(p. 700) (p 683) (p 655)
Epistylis procumbens
adoral zone of colony up to 1 mm long
membranelles (p.527)
#
Epicarchesium
pectinatum
colony up to 1.4 mm long;
notched-ffi
Stentor in preparations often
1 00-500 pm contracted to globular
Heterotrichida MASS
(p. 106) stalk muscle J (p 508)

Key to Main Groups and Species
special key lll
t"rril [<50 pm] species) t,.o,GenerarkevrV(p.68)orXr(p.7s)
adoral zoneof
membra-
nelles
W
Limnostrombidium Pelagostrombidium tintinnid which Rimostrombidium H a I te r i a/P e I a g o h a I te r i a
pelagicum mirabile left lorica Oligotrichida lll OliEotrichida ll
30-60 pm 30-70 pm Oligotrichida I (p. 105) (p 104)
(P.574) (p. 5e0) (p. 103)
vwUttLeZ oral flaps
armourffi
conspicuous ",il,"#' l\
cortical "
windows
alveoli \
Urotrircnhäa Balanion Pelagothrix Coleps
rostomat:idCaa ll,lll planctonicum Prostomatida Prostomatida
I I
(p. 100, 1r001) 10-22 pm (p. ee) usually 50-70 pm
(p. 363) (p gÖ)
,ffir
w)
ffi
r^,
I @
vorticellids Ophrydium Epistytis pygmaeum Astylozoon Trichodina
Peritrichia ll, lll naumanni 22-50 pm Peritrichia I Peritrichia I
(p. 96, 97) 40-50 pm (p. 535) (p. e5) (p. e5)
(p 551)
cone
bristles
macronucleus
tentacles
Mesodinium Actinobolina Belonophrya Askenasia/ Monodinium
Gymnostomatea ll smalli pelagica Rhabdoaskenasia Gymnostomatea lll
(p. e1) 42-60 pm 40-70 pm Gymnostomatea lll (p e2)
(p. 115) (p. 124) (p e2)
mucous lorica
attached to
mouth
debris
macronucleus Colpoda
steinii
Histiobalantium Cyrtolophosis 10-60 pm,
bodamicum mucicola usua!!y
40-60 pm 20-40 pm 20-40 pm
@. a2a) (p. 718) nucleolus (p.714)

Key to Main Groups and Species
SpeCial key lV
("on"picuousty cotoured or dark species)
from General key V (p. 69)
colour
conspicuously spotted (violett, grass green by + black at x100
green, blue, orange ...) bv zoochlorellae and/or
ngested cyanobacteria or other cleptoplasts (note:
i
food number of algae
sometimes rather Iow!)
Special key V
Differentiation of zoochlorellae
absent; conical present; and food vacuoles with green Stentor
algae: zoochlorellae are about
basket (arrow) triangular oral 5 pm in size and lie singly in the amethystinus
opening (arrow) cytoplasm, that is, are not en- 250-500 pm
closed in a vacuole as ingested
f ring algae (p. 664)
contractile
vacuole yellow-gree
Pelagostrombidium/
Limnostrombidium
Obertrumia Frontonia
30-70
aurea leucas Um
Oligotrichida ll
120-250 pm 120-600 pm
(p
104)
(p. 700) (p. 41 6)
bluish-green reddish-green brownish
present absent
Pelagostrombidium
somatic cilia
fallax
Stentor araucanus 40-90 pm windows in Cyclotrich i u m bru n neu m
100-270 pm (p. 585) armour 1 00-1 05 pm
(p. 671) Species not treated in detail!
reniform bretzel-shaped
WinoowsHfl
AäII\ <.*[
1trI1 jffi
Coleps hirtus hirtus or C. elongatus
Coleps nolandi
Prostomatida
40-65 I
Um
(p.2e7) (p. ee)

Key to Main Groups and Species
SpgGial kgy V
(srass sreen coloured, usually by zoochlorellae)
Peritrichia
yes
I
rnrpE
f
campanulate slender vase-shaped
Ophrydium
protargol-i m preg nated
peritrich
40-50 pm 250-400
.
Vorticella \ 1 112 <1/2
colonies *
chlorellata up to
44-64 pm ,( 15 cm ./
across
(p. 4e1)
O. naumanni
solitary or colonies
with <20 zooids #*ffi
contracted
(P. 551)
Ophrydium
50-1 50 pm
O. versatile O. eutrophicum
<200 pm >200 pm 300-400 pm 250-350 pm
Special key Vl (p. 543) (p 540)
cap-shaped in lateral broadly ellipsoidal 1 proboscis 3 proboscides
view, cordiform in
ventral view foamy cytoplasm
(populations with few
zoochlorellae
requent)
f
macronucleus
Stokesia vernalis
Bursellopsis Pelagodileptus Teuthophrys
1 00-220 pm spumosa trachelioides trisulca trisulca
(p. a3e) pm
400-800 pm 230-800 1 50-300 pm
(p.232)
(p.372) (p. 238)

Key to Main Groups and Species
SpeCial key Vl
(grr"s green cotoured, usuatty by zoochtorettae)
<1 00 pm 100-200 pm
Special key Vll
shape
with 3 proboscides with prominent pyramidal, anterior cap-shaped in lateral
oral cone end with 3 hucksters view, cordiform in
ventral view
populations
with few
zoochlorellae
f requent
Didinium
Teuthophrys Disematostoma Stokesia vernalis'
trisulca trisulca chlorelligerum tetraedricum 100-220 pm
pm
1 50-300 pm B0-1 10 100-1 50 pm (p. a3e)
167)
(p. 238) (p. (p. 414)
globular, ellipsoidal, or obovoidal broadly campanulate
lacking
Liliimorpha viridis
diameter 110 pm
(p. 164)
shape; mouth
ellipsoidal; aprcal obovoidal;
subapical
Pelagovasicola Cyclotrichium
cinctum viride
50-1 B0 pm 66-1 50 pm
(p. 21 3) (p. 205)
Disematostoma
Pel ag oth rix p I an cti col a buetschlii
55-1 00 pm 110-200 pm
(p. 401) (p. aoe)

Key to Main Groups ar-rd Species
SpeCial key Vll
tgrrss sreen by zoochlorettae or cteptoplasts)
AM = adoral zone of membranelles
from Special key Vl
conspicuous ciliary corona (AM) at anterior end
present absent
Special key
shape; jumping bristles
globular, urceolate or pyriform; present obconical;
absent
l-shaped L-shaped
*
{ü*
*
t
**
Askenasia chl orel I igera
30-50 pm
(p. 151)
Halteria bifurcata Pelagohalteria vi rid is
20-30 pm 20-30
Lrm
(p. 554) (p. 56e)
distinct cortical ridges
absent present
flat, short; extends almost deep, long; extends
horizontally near anterior body meridionally to near posterior
end body end
Pelagostrombidium
mirabile
30-70 pm
(p. 5e0)
Rimostrombidium
inner adoral
velox
Wtiiir, membranelles
111 30-50 pm
lli|',[i, Limnostrombidium inner adoral (p 604)
membranelles
viride
50-70
Pm
extrusomes
(p.577)

Key to Main Groups and Species
SpeCial key VIII
(grass green cotoured, usuatty by zoochlorettae)
prominent oral cone
present absent
absent
windows in
armour plate
macronucleus Coleps spetai or
C. hirtus viridis
Monodinium Didinium Prostomatida I
chlorelligerum chlorelligerum (p ee)
40-60 pm B0-110 pm
(p. 1eB) (p. 167)
ciliary girdles
lacking
macronucleus
elongate ellipsoidal
vermiform
§
macro-
nucleus
Pelagovasicola Cyclotrichium 2 nodules
cinctum viride
50-1 B0 pm 66-1 50 pm
(p. 21 3) (p. 205)
lt
- tentacles
Acti n obol i n a wen rich i i smalli Pelagothrix
pm
B0-1 25 pm 42-60 Prostomatida I
(p. 123) (p 115) (p. ee)

Key to Main Groups and Species
SpeGial key lX 1 Discrimination of cilia and cirri (=
(macronucreus)
several adhering cilia forming fairly
thick bundles): if you see cilia at a
from General keys Vl, X (p.70,74) magnification of x 100-400, that is,
without oil immersion, then these
macronucleus are very likely cirri!
2 nodules moniliform different
Special key X
ado ral zone of
membranelles (AM
present absent
present absent 300-500 pm; B0-1 25 pm;
club-shaped oviform
\-
tintin n id
which left Lepidotrachelo- Actinobolina
tintin n ids Iorica phyllum lineare (p.262) wenrichii
Hypotrichia Oligotrichida
I or Trachelophyllum (p. 123)
(p. 106) (p. 103)
Spp. (species not treated)
adoral zone of membranelles (AM)
present absent
70-120 um >1 00 pm
obconical; absent fusiform; present
Linostomella
vorticella
100-21 0 pm
(p. 655)
Pelagolacrymaria
moserae
(p. 265) Paradilepfus Pelagodileptus
elephantinus trachelioides
00-450 pm 230-800 pm
1
(p.221) (p.232)

Key to Main Groups and Species
SpeGial key X
(macronucreus)
macronucleus
vermiform J-shaped C-shaped
contracted
present
nnt
present absent
Peritrichia
(p e5)
§
present absent
complicated oral
macro- ciliature in deep
nucleus cavity
Teuthophrys
Stentor trisulca
araucanus 50-300 pm
1
100-270 pm (p. 238) extrusome fringe;
oral apparatus
(p. 671)
absent; small funnel present; large opening
tentacles -
aboral
basal body
ring Ophrydium
Peritrichia
I
(p e5)
Actinobolina radians or A, vorax Marituja pelagica
(Gymnostomatea ll) B0-1 60 pm
(p e1) (p. 431)
oral cone
adoral zone of
membranelles
f, complicated
oral ciliature in
deep cavity
macronucleus
,\\\§\\\\\\\\§\\\§\\\\§
Didinium/Monodinium Rimostrombidium
Gymnostomatea lll, V Peritrichia Oligotrichida lll
(p. 92, 93) (p e5) (p. 105)

Key to Main Groups and Species
Special key Xl
(species with conspicuous fringe of rods
[extrusomes; E] or with bundles of extrusomes) trom General key v! (p. 70)
Bursellopsis
Urotricha
{V Prostomatida IV
(p. 102)
processes
all hymenostomes Monodinium Mesodinium Limnostrombidium or
Hymenostomata Gymnostomatea lll Gymnostomatea Il Pelagostromb,idium
(p e4) (p. e2) (p e1) Oligotrichida Il
(p. 104)
Special key Xll
(species with conspicuous ciliary girdles
[af fOWS]) tro, General key vl (p. 70) oral cone
processes __
macro-
nucleus
A s ke n as i a/R h a b d o a s ke n a s i a Mesodinium Monodinium Didinium
Gymnostomatea lll Gymnostomatea ll Gymnostomatea lll Gymnostomatea V
(p. er 2) (p e1) (p e2) (p e3)
,3
/
*ffi:-
'$ffi'
\ K
--''
r, "'";i{";:Y;,!:li"'"
\ l\l\\"' 1 I '\ -./ rr Oligotrichida ll
&(p.93,)
Balantidion, Pelagovasicotaor Cyclotrichium, Gymnostomatea lV (p. 10a)
(
epizoic |
/d1
_ ',
swarmersof f .l
peritrichs
Opisthonecta Trichodina - I, ' ', 1
henneguyi
Peritrichia U:-Iiilr3''"'ffi
I
1 00-1 50 pm \ (p e5)
(p. 467)

Key to Main Groups and Species
l
ym nostomatea
t tvtrvrr r r-___*.,
l-robo-r"iatl
present (3 proboscides) present (1 proboscis) absent
obconical; usiform; elongate as campanulate,
f
absent present shown in globular,
figures below oviforffi, pyriform,
(ciliature
ellipsoidal, with
oral cone
1 Do not confuse Gymnostomatea II
with oral cone of
macron ucleus
Monodinium/
Dininium
ÜO()
Teuthophrys trisulca
trisulca (with zoochlorellae)
T. trisulca africana
(without zoochlorellae)
50-300 pm
1
(p. 238) Paradileptus Pelagodileptus
elephantinus trachelioides
00-450 pm 230-800 pm
1
(p.221) (p.232)
<150 300-500 x 60-1 25 pm
I
transversely + distinct head
truncated
yes
10-21 nodules reniform
7
head
Balantidion Lagynophrya
pellucidum acuminata
70-100 pm 70-95
Um
(p.252) (p. 258)
Pelagolacrymaria Pelagolacrymaria Lepidotrachelo-
moserae rostratd phyllum lineare
70-120 pm 100-120 pm (p.262)
2Species not treated in detail! (p. 265) (p.267)

K"y to Main Groups and Species
Gym nostomatea I f rom 1 lnconspicuous in Mesodinium,
I Gymnostomatea where they appear bristle-like
r
2 Usually, tentacles are numerous
ciliary girdlesl; tentacles (in morbid retractile rods with a small distal
specimens often difficult to recognize)z knob, i. e. are widest at the
anterior end. Cilia, cirri (= bundle
of cilia), ad- oral membranelles,
absent; present present; absent and spines gradually narrow to the
distal end, i. e. are widest at the
posterior (proximal) end
_
present
absent
tentacles
macronuclear
nodules
ellipsoidal to vermiform
reniform
ffi
oviform; 30-60, obovoidal; about
meridional 30, distinctly
Actinobotina
Actinobolina spira!
lttr]ililN
smalli 25v
42-60 pm 8o-1 4'M \\\ \llllllt ciliary rows
/
(p123)
(p. 115)
,/ Z4*ntacte{ö
Belonophrya
pelagica
40-70 pm
Actinobolina Actinobolina
(p. 124)
vorax radians
100-200 trm (p. 118) 65-90 pm
apical processes; size; (p. 112)
Acti n o bo I i n a/Be I o n op h rya bnstles distally furcated
with extended tentacles
present; 12-30 yes absent; >20 pm; no or bristles
Do not confuse with --> Suctoria and Lrm;
Mesodinium absent
Heliozoa which Iack cilia, or with -+
Mesodinium spp. which are <30 pm Gymnostomatea lll
size; ciliary rows; circlets formed by anterior ciliary girdle; barbs
20-30 pm;23-34; 17-22 pm; -21; 12-20 pm; 16-25;
3; absent apical (= oral) 3; present (arrows) 2; absent
processes
distal
1 f urcation
2
3
middle
ciliary
M. pulex gird le M. fimbriatum M. acarus
(p. 13e) (p. 138) (p. 135)
Species not treated in detail!

Key to Main Groups and Species
from
Gymnostomatea lll
Gymnostomatea ll
shape; size
pyriform; <50 with + conspicuous oral cone; different
Um
Askenasia and Rhabdoaskenasia >50 Um Gymnostomatea lV
Didiniumand Monodinium
present absent
club-shaped rod-shaped or acicular
1; acicular rod-shaped
Askenasia
chlorelligera
30-40 pm Rhabdoaskenasia
(p 151) minima
contractile
20-25
Um vacuole(s)
(p 161) Askenasia volvox Askenasia acrostomia
l
species identification requires 30-50 Lrm 40-50 pm
careful live observation, especially (p. 154) (p 148)
of extrusomes and cortex, with oil ciliary girdlesl
immersion
2
2 Species not treated in detail!
Monodinium Didinium or dividing Monodinium
Gymnostomatea V
present girdle conspicuous extrusome fringe on body
,ciliary
present
M. chlorelligerum M. armatunf absent AL nt
40-60 pm 50-60 pm \ 'I
(p. 1eB) (p. 185) I
stout cone
t'
M. balbianii rostratum
laütun
65-1 00 p m
(p. 1e6) m
cone; extrusomes
)
stout; rod-shaped, 3 short; rod-shaped, short; 3 types, as shown below
types:2ptm,6 Um, 1 type, 5-1 0 pm
15-20 pm long long W
t«l
M. balbianii breviproboscis M. balbianii balbianii il
!;:i{,f,{r
45-70 Um 50-1 20 pm 202)
(p. 1e0) (p 182) U/ @
\.l,8Lrm
rons

Key to Mair-r Groups and Species
from Gymnostomateteaa lll
Gymnostomatea lV
shape
broadly campanulate almost disciform
(zoochlorellae that is, distinctly
present) wider than Iong
5-7 distinct girdles
Liliimorpha Cyclot'rriicchium
yes
viridis humniillisl
diameter 110 pm 25x5566pm
(p. 164)
pm;
about 100 about 60 pm;
than
broader longer than
Pelagovasicola long
broad
cinctum
50-1 B0 pm
(p. 21 3)
Cyclotrichium viride
66-1 50 pm
(p. 205)
1 Species not treated n detail! Cyclotrichium Cyclotrichium
i brunneuml
faureil
(p. 21 5)
Gym ostomatea V
n
cv,noloo#matea
III
zoochlorellae; size
present; B0-1 10 pm absent; 80-200 ;;m,
usually about 150 pm
?
oliury girdles
-
t
e/
contractile
vacuoles
macronucleus
Didi n i u m ch I orel I igeru m dividing Monodinium spp. Didinium nasutum
(p. 167) have 2 contractile vacuoles! (p. 171)
dividing Didinium spp. have 2
contractile vacuoles and 4 ciliary
girdles

Key to Main Groups and Species
Hymenostomata
>40 pm 5-50
AII species with distinct extrusome fringe! 1 Um
Hymenostomata VII in
zoochlorellael FOISSNER & BERGER (1996; p. 411)
1 Rare in several
populationbs present absent
shape; oral apparatus
obovoid; in anterior calyx-shaped, anterior end
cap-shaped in lateral view,
cordiform in ventral view; half of body with 3 hucksters (arrows); in
near mid-body anterior third of body
Stokesia vernalis Disematostoma Disematostoma
100-220 pm buetschlii tetraedricum
(p. a3e) 110-200 pm 00-140 pm
1
oral ciliary pattern (p. aoe) (p, +14)
of a hymenostome
length; shape
40-60 pm; broadly ellipsoidal B0-1 60 Um; obconical 120-600 pm, usually
to lemon-shaped 150-350 pm; elongate
obovoidal
- lono cilia
lv
macronucleus
\
extrusome fringe
Histiobalantium Marituja pelagica Frontonia leucas
bodamicum (p. 431) (p. +1 6)
(p. 424)

Key to Main Groups and Species
ldentif ication of peri-
Pef itf iChia I trichs usually requires
(rensth without stark) Iive observation!
habitus
large, green, globular or flabby and with spines different
flattened colonies up to 15 cm across
Ophrydium
uo]""\
present
Peritrichia ll
Actually, there is no character
\
>\.1 112 that would unequivocally sepa-
rate stalkless peritrichs f rom
Hastatella radians swarmers of stalked species.
40-60 pm Some experience is necessary,
and look for stalked peritrichs at
(p. a60) aboral ciliary your site. Usually, swarmers
#ffi wreath (AW); have an aboral ciliary wreath,
do not whirl food into buccal
bristles in centre cavity and/or have the oral
of posterior end apparatus recessed and closed.
colony lf movement is slow and
staggering and the peristome
absent; present; open, it may be a dying stalked
O. versatile O. eutrophicum presentl absent peritrich.
300-400 pm 250-350 pm
shape; adhesive disc
(p. 543) (p. 540)
with denticles; life
style
denticles
on ventral wall of on dorsa! wall of
peristomial unnel peristomial funnel
f coin-shaped or reel- like a truncated
Astylozoon faurei
ventral shaped; present; epizoic cone; absent;
complex
dorsal Trichodina f ree-living
contractile
vacuole pellicular
striae
reniform semicircular
micronucleus; Opisthonecta
number of henneguyi,
Astylozoon fallax denticles in 00-1 50 pm
1
adhesive disc;
40-70 pm (p. 467)
host
(p. affi)
A. faurei A. enriquesi
35-65 pm 35-65 pm
(p. 455) (p. a55)
inconspicuous; conspicuous;
24-36; hydrozoans, 19-22t planktonic
bryozoans, fish copepods
1 The bristles usually clearly separate Astylozoon spp. from
swarmers of stalked peritrichs
T. oediculus T. domergue
2 E rga es il oy aco n af pu ps ae rd tw usit ,h wsw hear rm e ths eo f dst oa rl ake d ip liae tr uitr ri ec h ms; klo eo sk 3fo -4r "v{rqiorr-roeiroe.r -e5, -l 00 pm megamicronucleata
la r l a e a l c a
windings within buccal cavity (see introduction to group; p. a50). @. a72) diameter 50-75 pm
However, olhet Opisthonecfa species have a normal-sized oral @. a7e)
apparatus and are thus even more difficult to separate from
swarmers of stalked peritrichs. Species not treated in detail!

Key to Main Groups and Species
Peritrichia ll
from Peritrichia
I
(length without stalk) 1 Occasionally, epiplanktonic, colonial
peritrichs detach with the stalk from the
substrate. lf in doubt, follow keys
"Peritrichia lll, lV"
present (usually hyaline or deserted absent
and thus easily overlooked)
Ophrydium versatile or
O. eutrophicum (-+ Peritrichia l)
epiplanktonic, that is, euplanktonic, that is,
There are rather many loricate
epiphytoplanktonic peritrich s (Vaginicola, attached to other planktonic not attached to other
Thuricola, ...), which are poorly known and organisms (or debris) plankton organisms or
were thus excluded from the book Peritrichia Ill debrisl
(for determination, consult KAHL 1935,
SOMMER 1951 , STILLER 1940, 1971)
branched. (colonial) unbranched (solitary)
contractile; acontractile; acontractile; vase-shaped; campanu,late or
campanulate; absent campanulate; vase-shaped (globular present; pyriform; absent;
absent when contracted); acontractile contractile
present
peristomial collar;
stalk contraction
wider than body; narrower than
srew-like (arrow) body; whipe-like
peristomial collar
macronucleu
Epicarchesium Epistylis
pectinatum procumbens
40-70 pm 60-140 pm
(p. 508) (p.527)
Ophrydium
naumanni
solitary or in
small colonies
Pelagovorticella Pelagovorticella
40-50 pm
natans mayeri
(p. 551)
70-100 pm 30-55 pm
@, aB2) (p. a8o)

Key to Main Groups and Species
Peritrichia lll
(length without stalk)
unbranched (solitary) branched (colonial)
@ Epistylis
Peritrichia lV
present absent
Vorticella
chlorellata
44-64 present
Um
(p. 4e1)
absent
zigzag (sinuous); helical; usually > body Epistylis pygmaeum
usually body length length
=' 22-50 pm
Pseudohaplocaulus Vorticella and
epibiontic on planktonic
(usually attached to Pseudovorticella rotifers and crustaceans
Anabaena)
(p. 535)
or Rhabdostyla species
size; shape;surface; granules on stalk muscle
15-55 pm, usually 40-56 pm; campanulate; 50-70 pm; 50-70 pm;
35 pm; pyriform; fine transverse striae, few campanulate; fine campanulate; vesicular;
coarse transverse to numerous blisters;; transverse striae; inconspicuous
striae; very inconspicuous conspicuous
inconspicuous
contractile
vacuole
benthic and usually attached usually
epiphytO- to planktonic benthic
planktonic diatom colonies
Vorticella Vorticella vernalis Pseudovorticella
r
aquadulcis complex (p.4e4) rnonilata
(p. a8o) Vorticella picta I
I
\ I
(p. aeo) Species not treated in
detai!!
location of contractile vacuoles (arrows) (detailed description in
FOISSNER et al. 1992c)
both on ventral wall of peristomial one on ventral, the other on dorsal wall of
dorsal f unnel peristomial funnel
Zu"nt
^t
Pseudohaplocaulus
inf ravacuolatus P. anabaenae
40-50 pm
P. infravacuolatus arrows mark Vorticella chlorellata
Species not treated
47-67 pm in detail!
(P. 501)

Key to Main Groups and Species
Peritrichia lV
from Peritrichia lll
(length without stalk)
annulated smooth
>60 pm
#macronucleus
qH
epizoic, mainly usually attached
on cyclopids to planktonic I
rotifers and
crustaceans
Epistylis digitalis Epistylis pygmaeum
60-1 20 pm (p. 535)
(p. 523)
size; stalk; shape
60-1 00 Um; B-1 2 pm; >100 pm;20-26 pm; barrel-shaped
funnel-shaped
macronucleus
refractile granules
macronucleus
epizooplanktonic,
usually on benthic
usually on
invertebrates
crustaceans
Epistylis anastatica Epistylis nympharum
(p. 515) (p. 521)
Species not treated in detail!

Key to Main Groups and Species
I
Do not confuse with
Prostomatida
fenestrated armour plates and extrusome fringe!
I
minute spines at rear end
Species identif ication usually re-
quires live observation and silver present absent
impregnation. Study carefully "Com- Coleps
parison with related species"!
zoochlorellae
present absent
with 5 windows each, with 4 windows each,
marginal ridge marginal ridge not bretzel-shaped reniform
wing-like broadened wing-like broadened
(arrowheads)
fetzel-shaped with 4 with 5
window windows windows
each; 1 each;2
bretzel-shaped
windows C. nolandi
40-65 pm
C. hirtus viridis (p.2e7)
40-50 pm
C. spetai
(p.284)
C. elongatus
50-70 pm
60-80 pm
(p. 288) C. hirtus hirtus
(p.2e2)
40-65 pm
(p.273)
zoochlorellae rtical alveoli
cortex
extrusome
inconspicuous conspicuous alveoli form bright fringel
Prostomatida ll
body shape; cross-section; size; extrusomes
obovoidal; circular; triangular; triangular; broadly ellipsoidal and obliquely
40-60 pm, present 30-40 pm; absent? truncate anteriorly; + circular;
55-1 00 pm; present
P. alveolata
P. chlorelligera (p. 3e7) P. plancticola
(p. 3e5) Not treated in detail! (p. 401)

Key to Main Groups and Species
Prostomatida ll 1 Species identification needs
silver impregnation
O
pprreesseenn,t,; 400-800 pm 50 pm
<50 pm >50 pm
Prostomatida lV
(p. 102)
23 (usually at leasl 4) 1or2
Prostomatida III
f usiform rod-shaped
foamy
cytoplasm
Bursellopsis spumosa
(p.372)
ciliary rows; excretory pore 2.5-4.0 ;rm long; 2 size types: somatic
(EP) of contractile vacuolel 40-50 ones 3 pm long, those
Urotricha matthesi in posterior plug 6 pm
51-62; within circle 42-50; outside Iong; about 30
formed by caudal circle formed by
cilia caudal cilia
b'
l..
EP
caudal cilia
audal cilia
Urotricha castalia
30-40
Urotricha apsheronica Urotricha pelagica Lrm
40-75 pm (p. 302) 40-70 pm (p. 309) (p. 335)
number of adoral
organelles (arrows)t
O€
a
a
U. matthesi tristicha
35-45 pm (p.342)

Key to Main Groups and Species
Prostomatida lll
from Prostomatida Il
number of caudal cilia
as wide as body; small; short
long
very Urotricha
mouth
'tv/"uo'
size; shape; number of ciliary rows; extrusomes
pm;
30-55 pm; 18-25 pm; 15-30 10-20 pm;
jug-shaped;
broadly globular; 17-25; cone-shaped;
20-25;
ellipsoidal; inconspicuous 12-14;
35-51; distinct inconspicuous inconspicuous
Balanion
planctonicum
10-22 pm
(p. 363)
platystoma
U. U. globosa U. farcta U. agilis
35e)
(p. (p. 357) (p 351) (p. 348)
globular macronucleus
!
U däescoi sPecies not
361) - treated in detail!
(P.
posterior, unciliated body
portion distinctly set off plug-like
and reniform macronucleus!
size; shape; number of adoral organelles (arrows); extrusomes
t
20-30 Um; broadly 30-40 pm; ellipsoidal; 3; 15-30 Um,
ellipsoidal ; 2; absent present (minute) cylindroid al; 2;
3-4 Um long rods
l-
extrusome
II
Urotricha Urotricha llrotricha
f urcata macrostoma (p. 346) Ipseudofurcata
(p.344) Species not treated in (p.347)
detail!

Key to Main Groups and Species
from Prostomatida ll (p. 100) 1 If in doubt, use brosse
Prostomatida lV (silver impregnation or
interference contrast)
oral opening
AO = adoral organelles = brosse;
EP = excretory pore of contractile inconspicuous
vacuole; OB = oräl basket; UM =
undulating membrane shape; caudal cilia
posterior, ovoid or Elobular; present globular; absent
unciliated body
portion plug-like
set off from rest
of cell; present 60-1 20 x 40-80 Um; 55-70 x 45-55 pm;
9B-1 27 (meäh = 106) 76-87 (mean = 81)
§
AO
A
\*
: OB Longitricha
puytoraci
about 50 pm
=
,* (p. 368)
B
\, EP
oI
rri
,.....;,i t..
I
caudal cilia mes fusiform in all species
Urotricha venatrix Urotricha valida
cilary rows; excretory
(p. 315) (p. 313)
pore of contractile
vacuole
? (footnote 1)
a\
51-62; within circle 42-50; outside circle \
formed by caudal cilia formed by caudal cilia
1 2-20obliquely 3 + meridionally arranged,
a' aa "a al arranged short rows long rows
1O aa -
aO a (identification difficult,
a
a'
EP_o.. .
EP ö.
Urotricha Urotricha pelagica
apsheronica 40-70 pm
40-75 pm (p. 30e)
(p. 302)
Urotricha simonsbergeri
-
70-120 pm
(p.324)
size (in life); ciliary rows (mean, range); oral basal body pairs (mean, range); extrusomes
130-250 pm; 159, 100-200 pm; 116, B0-1 B0 Um; 90, 50-110 pm; 60,
1 30-1 98; 121, 95-1 40;75,60-98; 85-1 04; -, 46-60; 52-69; 42,32-50;
97-160; fusiform, 5-7 pm long fusiform, 3-4 pm long fusiforffi, 2.0-2.5 pm
rod-shaped, 10 pm \ \ \ \ \ long
I long \ \
e \ \
B. pelagica B. nigricans mobilis B. nigricans nigricans B. truncata
(p. 375) (P. 387) -(p. 383) -(P. 3e1)
-

Key to Main Groups and Species
Oligotrichida
I
present absent
Oligotrichida ll
shape of lorica; macronuclear nodules
1 Do not confuse deserted
loricae with shells of
urceolale; 2 cordiform;2 funnel-sh aped; 2 tubular; testate amoebae!
1or2 2 Lorica often deserted
when sample is older than
30 min. Specimens
\oorrl zone o{ without lorica become
membranelles stout-cylindroidal or
globular and are thus
easily confused with other
oligotrichs, especially
Rimostrombidium spp.
Check macronucleus
and/or ciliary pattern!
Codonella cratera Sten osemel la lacustris Tintinnidium
lorica 43-63 pm lorica 40-48 pm (p. 618) ephemeridum
(p. 617) Species not treated in detail! lorica 130-1 60 pm
(p 636)
macronuclear nodules; subterminal
lorica membrane (arrows)
lorica size
absent
2; present rolFrical
I ,"1:"0",1,fr.
usually >100 x 30 pm, usually <101 0 x 30 <90. pm
rather soft rather stable
composed of paired composed of single
basal bodies basal bodies
Membranicola
tamari
lorica 90-1 60 pm
(p. 626) Ti nti n n idi u m fl uviati le
, lorica 95-280 pm
(p. 637) Tintinnidium pusillum Ti nti n nopsis cyl i ndrata
lorica 48-90 lorica 40-90 pm
Um
3 Lorica of Membranicola tamari of similar size as (p. 642) (p 648)
in Tintinnidium fluviatile but composed mainly of
mineral particles and thus more stable.

Key to Main Groups and Species
from Oligotrichida
Oligotrichida ll I
jumping bristles
1 Do not confuse presentl absent
with Mesodinium
and Askenasia (-+ shape of jumping bristle complexes (protargol impregnation!)
Gymnostomatea)
l-shaped L-shaped
Halteria Pelagohalteria
absent; 3-6 basal present;7 basal bodies present; 8-1 absenl;7
1
body pairs arranged as shown
jumping
bristles
- /tl
/1
i* +
+
ü
ta
I
granair)n(
H. H. bifurcata P. viridis P. cirrifera
20-40 pm (p. 55e) 20-30 pm (p. 554) 20-30 pm (p. 56e) 25-50 pm (p. 566)
Either of the four features is sufficient to separate the groups: adoral zone of
membranelles; macronucleus; distinct, rod-shaped extrusomes;>3 meridionalto
spiral ciliary rows along + distinct cortical ridges (CR)
spiral; ellipsoidal in circular; semicircular
inner adoral mid-body; present; absent underneath adoral zone of
membranelles # Limnostrombidium or #m embranelles; absent;
Pelagostrombidium present
cR
Rimostrombidium
extrusomes
Oligotrichida lll
bucca! cavity; inner adoral membranelles (lAM)
flat, short; extend almost horizontally n.url deep, Iong; extend meridionally underneath mid-body
anterior body end: Limnostrombidium Pelagostrombidium
'
size; inner adoral membranelles; basal body
pairs in ventral ciliary row (VR; silver impregnation
50-70 pm; 12-16; 30-60 pm;8-12; reddish-brown (see frontis- yellowish or greenish (see
13-1 B 7-10 piece); 40-90 pm, mean f rontispiece) ; 30-70 pm,
70 x 60 pm; 19-22 mean 43 x 38 pm; 12-17
/-
P. fallax
(p. 585)
L. viride L. pelagicum P. mirabile -
(p. 577) (p. 574) (p. 5e0)

Key to Main Groups and Species
from Oligotrichida ll
Oligotrichida lll Rimostrombidium
70-120 pm
adoral zone of
present
\
macronucleus;
ciliary rows (CR)
reniform to circular;
3 or 6 (silver impregnation)
very prominent
cortical ridges
R. lacustris R. velox
(B-1 2 ciliary 30-50
LIm
rows, mostly 10) (about 8 ciliary rows)
(p. seo) (p. 604)
globular; about
1
Fmacronucleus
CR
R. humile
R. armeniensrs 12-38 pm
55-60 pm (p. 611)
(p. 5e5)
ciliary rows (arrows)
short long
,l\\ulil[
l[([
R. brachykinetum R. hyalinum
15-25 pm 22-35 pm
(p. 606) (p. 60e)

Key to Main Groups and Species
Heterotrichida
colou r; zooch lorel lae
;
macronucleus
dark or blackish; bluish-green; present;
colourless; absent;
present; globular vermiform to nodular
mgnilifOrm adoral zone of
membranelles
macron ucleus
freeely motile
(contracted) form
Stentor amethystinus Stentor araucanus
Li nostomel I a vorti cel la
250-500 pm 100-270 pm
100-210 pm
(p. 664) (p. 671)
(p. 655)
Hypotrichia
bursiform different
adoral zone of
membranelles
pisciform bizarr
broadly rounded; with cone-like anterior
with short process projection; broadly rounded
lateral view
Pelagotrichidium
faurei
about 280 pm
(p. 683)
do not confuse with
Bursaridium and Bursaria
+
( Colpodea)
Pseudostrombidium
planctonticum
120-160 pm
(p 685) Hypotrich id i u m con icu m
90-1 20 Vm (p. 677) Spi retel la plancticola
(possibly several 95-1 60 pm
rather similar species) (p. 688)
106

Key to Main Groups and Species
Colpodea
size; shape;
oral apparatus (OA)
20-40 pm; 10-60 pm, usually 80-200 pm, usually >250 pm; bursiform;
ellipsoidal to ovoid; 20-40 pm; reniform; 110-1 50 trm; bursiform; apical apical in large
anterior near midbody in large vestibulum, adoral vestibulum, adoral
zone curves to right zone curves to left
OA
OA
macronucleus
nucleolus
adoral
zone of
Iorica (often
organelles
deserted)
Cyrtolophosfs Colpoda Bursaridium Bursaria
mucicollt steinii pseudobursari* truncatellal,2
(p.718) (p.714) (p 70e)
lspecies not treated in detail! 2 Do not confuse with Pelagotrichidium faurei( -+ Hypotrichia)
SUCIOf ia
1r"ry likely, many epiphytoplanktonic and parasitic species have not yet
been described)
yes (do not confuse with + Actinobolina/
Belonophrya [Gymnostomatea ! I])
present; absent absent; present
Gajewskajoph rya mel osi rae
50-90 pm
(p.725)
heavily
vacuolized Mucophrya pelagica Staurophrya elegans
65-1 10 pm 50-65 pm
heliozoon (p.723) (p.727)

4.2
How to Use the Monograph
There is no generally accepted ciliate classification because phylogeny and evolution of the main grcups are still
discussed. Thus, we lumped distinct groups of species without assigning them to a specific macrosystem. Each
group is briefly characterized, that is, contains an introduction providing the user with an overview about its mor-
phology and ecology. Species descriptions follow a scheme, which is explained in the following paragraphs.
The heading contains the name of the species (in roman italics), the name (in capitals) of its describer(s), the
year of description, and the name and year of the combining author(s), if the species was transferred later to
another genus. Nomenclature follows the Intemational Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN 1985). Ac-
cordingly, the author(s) of the species, for instance, is enclosed in parentheses, if the species has been trans-
ferred to another genus. Furtherrnore, agreement in gender ofgenus and species name was checked.
The synonymy list contains the main references mentioned above and those studies which significantly con-
tributed to the knowledge of the species. However, KAHL's revision is always included, even if it contains
only literature data, because it was widely used for identification during the past 70 years. Synonyms are
considered only, if they contribute to the knowledge of the species or are in use in the current literature.
Typicalfy, a citation in the synonymy list consists of: (i) the year of publication; (ii) the name of the species
as written (frequently incorrect!) in the study concemed; (iii) the na{$e(s) of the author(s) of the study (origi-
nal description[s] separated from journal or book title by a comma, later [re]description[s] by a hyphen); (iv)
the journal (abbreviated according to the "World List of Scientific Periodicals") containing the study; (v) the
volume number (or year of publication when the volume number could not be located) of the journal; (vi)
the page number (separated from volume number by a colon) where the description of the species com-
mences; and (vii) in parentheses, the main content of the study.
The chapter nomenclature and taxonomy explains difficult and/or interesting nomenclatural and/or taxo-
nomic problems. Usually, this paragraph also contains information about the current status of the species, so
that ecologists can estimate the reliability of literature data.
The differential diagnosis contains the description of the species emphasizing characters recognizable in
vivo and by unspecialized workers because we are aware of the fact that ecologists and applied limnologists
will use silver impregnation only exceptionally. Complicated terms are largely avoided and, when used, ex-
plained in the figure legends andlor the introduction to the group. Furthermore, there is a glossary. However,
we presume a certain amount of basic knowledge in ecology and protozoology. For those not familiar with
protozoa and ciliates, we recommend the textbooks by CORLISS (1979) and HAUSMANN & HÜLS-
MANN (1996). The individual descriptions are ordered as follows: size, shape, nuclear apparatus, contractile
vacuole, extrusomes, symbiotic algae, somatic ciliary pattem, oral ciliary pattem, movement.
The chapter similar species should be consulted after each identification. It contains important remarks on
distinguishing the species from its nearest relatives and other similar-looking taxa. Furthermore, we indicate
in this chapter the most important features of the species. Only if these features match, the identification can
be considered as reliable!
The chapter ecology is organized in three sections: occulrence and distribution, autecological data, ecologi-
cal summary. Collecting and evaluating these data was very time-consuming because thousands of papers
had to be studied. Very likely, some (many?) records are misidentifications, although we discarded and/or
marked questionable identifications. Misidentifications certainly partially contribute to the broad ecological
range of certain species. On the other hand, many species possibly have a broad range, although most very
likely become abundant only under certain, much narrower conditions which we, unfortunately, not yet
108

How to Use the Monograph
know. Most of the species treated in this book are very likely cosmopolitan, although many have not yet
been recorded from all main biogeographical regions. The chemical data collected were transformed to SI or
current unites when appropriate, for instance, PO+3- to PO+3 -P. The ecological summary was extracted from
the data available on occurrence, distribution, and autecology as well as from more general ecological prin-
ciples.
Most figures are Xerox copies of the original illustrations or were prepared by us. Some were obtained by
colleagues. Generally, illustration is copious because figures are very helpful, especially for beginners. That
we show not only micrographs of living specimens but also of silver-impregnated cells and scanning elec-
tron micrographs does not mean that these methods are required for identification. These figures are mainly
a service for non-specialists, who can recognize certain features of their specimens more easily when they
can look how they appear under optimum conditions. Without exception, all main features of a certain spe-
cies are documented and labeled in at least one figure.
Magnifications. All important sizes are given in the differential diagnosis and in the explanations to the line
drawings (here marked by "? pm", if not provided in the original paper). Magnification was omitted from
micrographs, many of which show more or less heavily shrunken or inflated specimens.
109

4.3
Nomenclatural Summary
New genera: Pelagodileptus (p.232), Pelagolacrymaria (p.265), Pelagothrix (p.395), Membranicola (p. 626).
New species: Bursellopsis pelagica (p. 315), Membranicola tamari (p. 626), Pelagolacrymaria moserae (p.
265), Pelagothrix chlorelligera (p.395), Pelagothrix plancticola (p. 4Ol), Urotricha simonsbergeri (p.32D.
New subspeciesz Monodinium balbianii breviproboscis (p. 190).
New statusesz Bursellopsis nigricans mobilis (p. 387), Bursellopsis nigricans nigricans (p. 383), Coleps hirtus
hirtus (p.273), Coleps hirtus viridis (p.284), Monodinium balbianii balbianii (p. 182), Monodinium balbianii
rostratum (p. 196), Teuthophryts trisulca trisulca (p. 238), Teuthophrys trisulca africana (p. 238), Urotricha mat-
thesi matthesi (p. 340).
New name: Linostomella pro Linostoma JANKOWSKI (p. 655).
Corrected name: Teuthophrys africana pro Teuthophrys africanus (p. 238).
New combinations:
Bursaria vorticella EHRENBERG transferred to genus Linostomella, p. 655.
C arche sium py gmaeum EHRENBERG transferred to genus Epistylis,p. 535.
Didinium alveolatum KAHL transferred to genus Monodinium, p. 178.
Didinium armatum PENARD transferred to genus Monodinium, p. 191.
Didinium nasutum rostratum KAHL transferred to genus Monodinium,p. 196.
Dileptus trachelioides ZACHARIAS transferred to genus Pelagodileptus,p.232.
Holophrya mobilis WANG & NIE transferred to genus Bursellopsis, p. 387 .
Holophrya nigricans LAUTERBORN transferred to genus Bursellopsis, p. 383.
Lacrymaria rostrata KAHL transferred to genus P e lagolacrymaria, p. 265.
Strobilidium armeniensis ZHARIKOV transferred to genus Rimostrombidium, p. 595.
Urotricha alveolata KAHL transferred to genus Pelagothrix, p. 395.
Zoothamnium pectinatum ZACHARIAS transferred to genus Epicarchesium,p. 508.
It is suggested to synonymize the following species:
Bursellopsis spaniopogon HILLER with Bursellopsis truncata (KAHL), p. 391 .
Cy c lotric hium limneticum KAHL with Cyclotrichium viride GAJEWSKAJA, p. 205.
E nc he ly o do n ov um GROLIERE with B a I ant i dium p e I I uc idum EBERHARD, p. 252.
Holophrya gargamellae FAURE-FREMIET with Bursellopsis nigricans (LAUTERBORN), p. 3S3.
Leucophrys ovumFAIJRe-f'RgUmf with Disematostoma buetschlii LAUTERBORN, p. 409.
Paradileptus caducus KAHL with Pelagodileptus tachelioides (ZACHARIAS), p. 232.
Paradileptus canellai DRAGESCO with Pelagodileptus trachelioides (ZACHARIAS), p.232.
Paradileptus minutus DRAGESCO with Paradileptus elephanlinus (SVEC) ,p.221.
Paradileptus ovalisHIJBER-PESTALOZZIwithParadileptus elephantinus (§VpC), p.221.
Strombidium pelagicum KRAINER with Limnostrombidium pelagicum (KAHL), p. 574.
Urotricha armata KAHL with Urotricha platystoma STOKES, p.359.
New community: Karyorelictidetea (p. 54).
110

4.4
Description and Ecology of Species
4.4.1 Gymnostomatea sürscHLI, tsss
The class Gymnostomatea comprises the orders Gymnostomatida (for example -+ Paradileptus, -) Pelagodilep-
ras), Spathidiida (for example -+ Lepidotrachelophyllum, --> Pelagolacrymaria), Cyclotrichida (for example -+
Mesodinium, --> Askenasia), and Pleurostomatida which, however, do not include euplanktonic forms. FOISS-
NER et al. (1995) reactivated the name Gymnostomata, proposed by BÜTSCHLI (1889) and used for almost 100
years, for ciliates with mainly holotrichous somatic ciliature and rather simple, often very inconspicuous oral
ciliature (thus the name "naked-mouthed"). The junior names for this group (Litostomatea, Haptorida, Filicorti-
cata, Hornotricha, Rhabdophorina), largely proposed after 1980, are su-
perfluous because they usually comprise more than 50 7o of the taxa in-
cluded by BÜTSCHLI in the gymnostomatids.
The gymnostomes have four main features (see Figure for some charac- ,«i::'.'r\
ters): (i) The somatic ciliature is usually complete (holotrichous) and ii
i..,.:,:l
consists of meridional rows of monokinetids, that is, of single, ciliated
'.
basal bodies; in some genera, for example + Didiniuffi, + Monodinium, i i : :: : '
+ Mesodinium and + Askenasia, it is reduced to distinct girdles. At the ,'f . to .o . : o o '
anterior portion of some (usually 2_4) rows are short, paired cilia (bris- ,0 i . .
,
tles), which form the so-called dorsal brush; (ii) The oral opening is api- I l.: : :
cal, in dileptids it is at the base of a proboscis, and in the curious I t I
f' I
spathidiid + Teuthophrys it is surrounded by three proboscides. The a I t atalot
t t ato
more or less distinct oral bulge is surrounded by a circumoral ciliary a aa"
a
row, which is often inconspicuously separuted from the meridionally ex- ooaoaa
oo1-'
tending somatic ciliary rows. The circumoral row is composed of basal I oOO. a a
body pairs, which are associated with fine fibres (oral basket rods,
nematodesmata) usually forming an inconspicuous oral basket (rhab- a- ' .aatro-ao oaaia ooa ' o to - o '
dos); (iii) Usually the prey is killed by special extrusomes (toxicysts), 'oat.t11o'
.t3o
which are in the mouth andlor the cytoplasm; shape, size and arrange- a o_ atoooaa ro
OaaOOl
m tife icn at to if o t nh ;e (to ivxi )c y Sst ts o mar ae t oo gft ee nn e i sm isp o (r =ta n ft o f ro mr as tp ie oc nie s o o f r nev ee wn g men ou us thid )e n is- oo t a a a
\.t.to..too
telokin etal, that is, the oral ciliature originates from the anterior end of
the somatic ciliary rows (BERGER et al. 1983, FOISSNER I996b).
The Gymnostomat ida, Spathidiida and Cyclotrichida comprise about Ciliature of a gymnostomatid ciliate (only
basal bodies shown). CO = circumoral cili-
300 species, including many terrestrial forms. Species identification is
difficult because the last revision was performed, as in most other da ory r sr ao l w b, r uC sR h, = E S =or r elä xti tc ru c si oli mar ey s ,r o Ow Es, =D B or a= l
groups, by KAHL in 1930. However, the common freshwater species bulge or oral dome (OD) or proboscis (PR).
were redescribed by FOISSNER et al. (1995). Some taxa are very con-
+ +
spicuous, for example Paradileptus, which has a long proboscis, and the tentacle-bearing Actinobolina.
The gymnostomatids are widely distributed in limnetic, marine, and terresffial biotopes. Most freshwater species
are benthic, that is, colonize the aufwuchs and the sediment; abou'tZl taxa are euplanktonic and occur in the pe-
lagial of lakes and large rivers. The gymnostomes are predators, that is, they mainly feed on heterotrophic pro-
tists, such as flagellates and ciliates; large species even prey on small metazoans, especially rotifers. The prey is
killed by the ejected toxicysts and usually ingested whole. The predator-prey relationship of -s Didinium and
Paramecium has been well studied and often used as a model system (for example, HARRISON 1995). The
gymnostomes frequently have low abundances, as is usual for predators, and have thus often been neglected in
ecological studies. Several species, however, ile very large and thus significantly contribute to the biomass.
111

Gymnostomatea
Family Actinobolinidae KAHL, 1e3o
This family comprises four genera (CORLISS 1979): -+ Actinobolina, -+ Belonophrya, Dactylochlamys, and
Enchelyomorpha. However, only Actinobolina is frequently mentioned in the literature; but here, we redescribe
Belonophrya pelagica. Enchelyomorpha is a suctorian, as shown by FOISSNER & FOISSNER (1995) in a trans-
mission electron microscopical study.
Actinobolina and Belonophrya are easily identified by the long, highly contractile tentacles, each containing a
rod-like toxicyst. The tentacles, which capture prey and keep the body floating, are supported by a tube of micro-
tubules (HOLT et al. 1973), which winds up when the tentacle is retracted, forming a ringJike array in mid-body
(-+ Fig. 3, 6, 12 by A. vorax). All Actinobolina species are poorly described and need reinvestigation. Actinöbo-
lus rotundus and Actinöbolus piriformis, two widely overlooked species described by ESCOMEL (1929, p.26),
we consider as indeterminable because they were not illustrated and poorly described.
Actinob olina radian s (srErN, 867) srRAND, tszl
1
1867 Actinobolus radians STEIN, Organismus der Infusionsthiere II, p. 169 (without illustration but with suffi-
cient diagnosis).
1912 Actinobolus radians - MOODY, J. Morphol., 23:365 (detailed redescription from life).
1928 Actinobolina radians - STRAND, Arch. Naturgesch., 92: 30 (rectification of homonymy).
1930 Actinobolina radians STEIN, 1852 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dfl., 18: 138 (revision).
l93l Actinobolina radians STEIN, 1867 - KAHL, Arch. Protistenk.,T3:431 (detailed redescription from life).
1995 Actinobolina radians (STEIN, 1867) STRAND, 1928 - FOISSNER, BERGER, BLATTERER & KOH-
MANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, U95:243 ("Ciliate-Atlas",
that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
Actinobolina radians sensu FINLAY et al. (1988) and sensu VUXANOVICI (1963) have symbiotic green algae,
indicating that they were -+ A. smalli. Actinobolina radians sensu MAYER (1998) is -+ Belonophrya pelagica.
For the differential diagnosis, we use only the data provided by KAHL (1930, l93la), who first separated -+ Ac-
tinobolina vorax from A. radians.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 65-90 x 50-65 pm.
2) Body usually obovate and unflattened (Fig. 1,2,6).
3) Macronucleus long and tortuous (Fig. 1).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end (Fig. 1, 6).
s) Many highly contractile tentacles, containing a rod-shaped toxicyst (12x0.3 pm) each in distal end, within
ciliary rows. Fully extended tentacles up to several times as long as body (Fig. l, 4-7); contracted tentacles
very likely form ring-like array in mid-body. No symbiotic green algae.
6) About 30 spiral ciliary rows, likely composed as in -+ A. vorax (Fig. 1, 5, 7). KAHL described a dorsal brush
of almost body length (Fig.2,5; difficult to recognize, not necessary for identification).
t12

Gymnostomatea
7) Oral opening in centre of anterior body end, covered by flat, circular bulge (Fig. l, 2). Oral ciliature not yet
studied in detail, likely as in -s A. vorax (not necessary for identification).
8) Rotates with partially retracted tentacles about main body axis, rests from time to time with mouth downward
and moored by means of tentacles. Gradually the retracted tentacles elongate until the cell is apparently sur-
rounded by a halo of short, opaque rods at varying distances from body.
Similar species
Difficult to separate from -> A. vorax, which is usually larger (100-200 pm long) and has more (30-60 vs. about
30) and meridionally extending (distinctly spiral in A. radians) ciliary rows. -+ Actinobolina wenrichü has two
macronuclear nodules and, Iike -+ A. smalli, symbiotic green algae. -+ Belonophrya pelagica has a broadly ellip-
soidal macronucleus. At low magnification, Actinobolina species should not be confused with heliozoans and -->
suctoria, which lack cilia. 1, 3, 5 (no symbiotic green algae), 6 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Note that Aclinobolina radians was very likely sometimes confused with the very similar -+ Actinobolina vorax.
Occurrence and distribution: Rather common in ponds and lakes, especially among macrophytes and during
the warm seasons; not pelagic sensu stricto (KAHL 1930), that is, occasionally benthic, in running waters, and
even in ephemeral puddles because resting cysts can be formed (Fig. 3). The locus classicus is near the,village of
Niemegk, Germany, where STEIN (1867) discovered A . radians among Lemna.
Further records substantiated by illustrations: abundant in a pond in the Botanical Garden of Klausenburg, Roma-
nia (ENTZ 1882; probably mixed with -+ Belonophrya pelagica); in stagnant waters near Hamburg, Germany,
among macrophytes (KAHL 1930, l93la); rock-pool from bank of Neckar River near Heidelberg, Germany
(ERLANGER 1890; including specimens with ellipsoidal macronucleus, very likely --> Belonophryta pelagica);
Moldavian water basin (CHORIK 1968); Tibet (SHEN 1983); rare in a pond in the Van Cortlandt Park, New
York, USA (CALKINS 1901, MOODY l9l2); mud-samples from Madagascar (SONDHEIM 1929).
Records not substantiated by illustrations: several specimens in ponds of Tyrol, Austria (DALLA TORRE 1891);
naturally polluted pool in the woody inundation area of the Elbe River, Czechoslovakia (PROKESOV A |SSS);
lake (Prester See) in Germany (HONIGMANN 1909); single specimen in an irrigated meadow of Bavaria, Ger-
many (DINGFELDER 1962); cooling system of a conventional power station supplied with water from the
mesosaprobic Main River, Germany (BERNERTH 1982); waters (puddles, lakes, marsh) in Bulgaria and Hun-
gary (DETSCHEWA 1972, KREPUSKA 1917, 1930, STILLER 1942a); experimental rice paddy irrigated with
water from the Po River, Italy (MADONI 1987, 1988, 1996); polluted waters in Italy during February, May, and
October (CANELLA 1954); polluted waters in The Netherlands (VERSCHAFFELT 1930); up to 100 ind.lr in
an ephemeral pond near Basle, Switzerland, during July (RIGGENBACH 1922); Ukrainian ponds (OLEKSIV
1985); planktonic and benthic in ponds, lakes, and reservoirs of the USSR (BELOVA 1994, DOBROVLIANSKI
1914, KORNIYENKO 1972, MINKBWTSCH 1898, NEBRAT 1980, ZHARIKOV 1992,ZHARIKOV & RO-
TAR 1992); Indonesia (VAN OYE 1922)', Tibetan Plateau (WANG 1977); China (NING er al. 1993, SHEN &
GU 1965, YANG 1989); pond in Pennsylvania from May to September with a peak (1300 ind. tr) in May
(WANG 1928); Iowa, USA (SHAWHAN et al. l94l); Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (CUNHA 1913, PINTO 1925).
Records, mainly planktonic, from running waters: about 350 ind. 1-r in the mesosaprobic Sava River (Croatia)
only during January (PRIMC-HABDIJA et al. 1996); alphamesosaprobic lowland brook in Germany (HEUSS
1976); Danube River and its ox-bows in Austria and Hungary (BERECZKY 1991, BERECZKY et al. 1983,
HUMPESCH & MOOG 1994, NOSEK & BERECZKY l98l); Po River, Italy (FERRARI et al. 1989); Volga
River basin, USSR (MAMAEVA 1979, 1979b); polluted sites of the Yamuna River at Delhi, India (RAI 1974);
Scioto River, USA (LACKEY 1938b).
113

Gymnostomatea
According to VtrRSCHAFFELT (1930) also in brackish waters. WILBERT (1995) found A. radians near the
bottom of saline lakes in Canada. Actinobolina spp. occuralso in (semi)terrestrial biotopes (FOISSNER 1998).
Autecological data: Feeds mainly on ciliates, such as -+ Halteria grandinella, Balladyna and Stylonychia
(CALKINS 1901, DINGFELDER 1962, KAHL 1930, MOODY l9l2); Chilomonas, Trachelomonas, Euglena,
Urocentrum, Paramecium, Bursaria and Colpoda are not attacked (CALKINS l90l). Resting specimens are
moored to the substrate by the anterior tentacles. In this position, where the mouth is directed downward, A. radi-
ans lurks for prey while the cilia beat slowly, possibly to renew the surrounding water (CALKINS 1901, KAHL
1930, l93la, MOODY 19l2). Some tentacles extend to the full length of about 250 pm, most of them, however,
are about 70 pm long (Fig. 6). Captured prey is paralysed immediately by the toxicysts and transported to the
mouth by means of the tentacles and the beating cilia (KAHL l93la). CALKINS (1901, 1926) observed an in-
gestion rate of up to 10 -+ Halteria grandinella specimens within 20-30 min. Biomass of 106 middle-sized speci-
mens about 125 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1995).
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Eurasia only. Rather common in the plankton of ponds and lakes,
but also in running waters and terrestrial biotopes because resting cysts can be formed. Usually among macro-
phytes and sometimes benthic; prefers the warm seasons. Preys mainly upon -+ Halteria grandinella. Saprobic
classification according to FOISSNER et al. ( 1995): betamesosaprobic (o = 1, b = J , a = 2,I = 3, SI = 2.1).
oB
-l
TT
MA
C
'/l))
I
DB
TT
Actinobolina radians in vivo (1, fiom KAHL 1930; 2 J,from KAHL l93la). 1,2: Dorsal views,80 pm (cilia and tentacles omitted in Fig-
ure 2 to show ciliary pattern and dorsal brush more clearly). Note that the ciliary rows extend spirally, which is, according to KAHL, an im-
portant difference to -+ A. vorax, where they are meridionally arranged. Arrow in (2) denotes flat oral bulge. 3: Resting cyst with blunt pro-
trusions. 4: Distal portion of a tentacle containing an about 12 x 0.3 pm-sized toxicyst. 5: Posterior polar view. The bristles of the dorsal
brush are 3 pm long; the clustered, about 20;:m long normal somatic cilia are only partially shown. 6: Posterior polar view of a specimen
lurking for prey. Note the very long tentacles, which make, together with the cilia and the vacuolate cytoplasm, Auinoholina radians look
like a heliozoan. 7: The distance of the tentacles within a ciliary row is about l0 Um. C = somatic cilia, CV = contractile vacuole, DB = dor-
sal brush, E = extrusome (toxicyst), MA = vermiform macronucleus, OB = oral basket, TT = tentacles.
tt4

Gymnostomatea
Actinobolina smalli HoLT, LyNN & coRLISS, 1973
1973 Actinobolina smalli HOLT, LYNN & CORLISS, Protistologica,9: 521 (description, including ultrastruc-
ture; see HOLT & CORLISS 1973 for further ultrastructural data).
1988 Actinobolina smalli HOLT, LYNN & CORLISS, 1974 - KRAINER, Dissertation, p. 101 (redescription
from life and after silver impregnation).
Taxonomy
Actinobolina radians sensu VUXANOVICI (1963) has, like A. smalli, symbiotic green algae and an elongate
macronucleus; however, it is more than twice as long as A. smalli (100-140 pm vs. 42-60 pm), indicating that it
is a different species.
D i f f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (detailed morphometric data, see Table on nextpage)
1) Size in vivo about 4240 x 2642 pm.
2) Body usually ovoid (Fig. 1, 5).
3) Macronucleus longish, not yet studied in detail (Fig. 1, 5).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end (Fig. 1).
5) About 6-10 regularly spaced, highly contractile tentacles, each containing a rod-shaped toxicyst
(12-13 x 0.3 pm) in distal end, within ciliary rows. Fully extended tentacles up to 150 pm long (Fig. 1, 3, 4);
contracted tentacles form ring-like affay in mid-body (Fig. 2). Symbiotic green algae present (Fig. 1, 5).
6) About 19-24 mendional to stightly spiral ciliary rows composed of short (1.5 pm) and long (about 20 pm)
cilia, which form more or less distinct groups between the tentacles (Fig. 1, 3, 4). One dorsal brush row,
about half as long as body, with paired bristles (Fig. 3; not necessary for identification).
7) Oral opening in centre of anterior body end, covered by flat bulge and surrounded by circumoral ciliary row
composed ofbasal body pairs (Fig. 1-5; details only recognizable after silver impregnation, not necessary for
identification).
8) Movement not known, likely as in congeners, that is, slowly swimming by rotation about main body axis and
floating with extended tentacles when lurking for prey.
Similar species
Easy to separate from all other --> Actinobolina species and from -+ Belonophrya pelagica by the symbiotic
green algae and the single, elongate macronucleus. -+ Actinobolina wenrichii, which is also green due to symbi-
otic algae, has two macronuclear nodules and is usually larger (80.-125 pm). 3 and 5 (tentacles and symbiotic
green algae present) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Rare, planktonic and in the bottom region of ponds and lakes. The locus classicus
of Actinobolina smalli is near Lake of the Woods, east-central Illinois (USA), where HOLT et al. (1973) discov-
ered a bloom of the organism in the Fountain Pond spillway in summer. KRAINER (1988) found A. smalli in ex-
cavated groundwater ponds of Styria during September and under ice. VUXANOVICI (1963) observed this or a
similar species (-+ taxonomy) in a lake (Fundeni) near Bucharest, Romania. FINLAY et al. (1988) found a
zoochlorellae-bearing --> A. radians in Priest Pot, a productive pond in England.
115

Gymnostomatea
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on ciliates and rotifers (HOLT et al. 1913, KRAINER
1988). The symbiotic green algae indicate that it can sustain periods of low supply by using the algae and/or their
metabolites. Biomass of 106 middle-sized specimens about 1l mg. HOLT et al. (1973) found a mass occurrence
of A. smalli at water temperature of 24-27" C and pH slightly under 7; Paramecium aurelia, P. bursaria, -+ Hal-
teria grandinella, other protozoa, and physid snails and snail eggs were collected with A. smalli, which occurred
nearby on or in the vicinity of decaying leaves.
Table: Morphometric data from Actinobolina smalli (from KRAINER 1988).
Characterl Mean SD SE CV Min Max n
Body, length 34.8 4.5 t.2 t2.9 30 42 t2
Body, width 25.4 5.0 t.4 t9.5 20.4 35 t2
Oral basket, diameter at opening 5.9 1.1 0.3 18.0 3.6 7 10
Oral basket, length t4.0 2.6 0.8 18.4 11 20.4 10
Macronucleus, length t5.4 1.8 0.6 1 1.5 t2 18 10
Macronucleus, width 10.3 2.1 0.9 26.3 1 t4.4 10
Micronucleus, diameter 2.3 0.4 0.1 t6.2 t.2 2.4 10
Micronuclei, number 2.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2 2 10
Ciliary rows, number on one side 10.8 0.8 0.3 6.9 10 l2 6
Ciliary row, number of basal bodies 2t.0 3.2 t.3 6.6 18 21 6
Toxicysts (tentacles), number per ciliary row 6.8 0.8 0.3 1 1.0 6 8 6
Toxicysts, length 5.9 0.8 0.2 t4.3 3.6 1.2 11
Data based on protargol-impregnated and mounted specimens. Measurements in pm. CV = coefficient of variation in Vo, Max =
maximum, Mean = arithmetic mean, Min = minimum, n = number of specimens investigated, SD = standard deviation, SE = standard er-
ror of mean.
tt6

Gymnostomatea
TT+[
TT
t
\
CV
tt'r\*
trotl G
lr tt'
[t.l
l-t . .
\ 3:
t.-[i:l
4
Actinobolina smalli (l-3, fiom KRAINER 1988, slightly rnodified by KRAINER ibr an unpublished manuscripl; 4, 5, äom HOLT et al.
1973.l,invivo;24, protargol impregnation; 5, Richardson's stain). 1: Total view of a specimen with retracted tentacles, length 45-60 pm.
2:Lateral view showing oral basket and retracted tentacles, which form ring-like array in mid-body. Note curious shape (rod with a distal
dot) of extrusomes. 3, 4: Lateral and oblique anterior polar view of ciliary pattem. The circumoral row (CO) is composed of basal body
pairs; only one basal body of each pair is ciliated. 5: Longitudinal section, 1 pm thick, revealing the flat oral bulge, the oral basket rods
(nematodesmata) extending near mid-body, the longish macronucleus (asterisks), and the symbiotic green algae accumulated in the posterior
body portion. C = somatic cilia, CO = circumoral ciliary row, CR = somatic ciliary rows, CV = contractile vacuole, DB = single-rowed dor-
salbrush,E=extrusomes(toxicysts),MA=macronucleus,OB=oralbasket,OE=oralbulge,OO=oralopening,SA=symbioticgreenal-
gae, TT = tentacles.
t17

Gymnostomatea
Actinobolina vora.r (wENRrcH, tgzg) KAHL, 1930
1922 Actinobolus radians STEIN 1859 - PENARD, Etudes infusoires, p. 34 (misidentification).
1929 Actinobolus vorax WENRICH, Biol. Bull. mar. biol. Lab. Woods Hole, 56: 390.
1930 Actinobolinavorax WENRICH, 1929 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 139 (combining author).
1962 Actinobolina vorax WENRICH 1929 - DINGFELDER, Arch. Protistenk., 105: 552 (redescription).
1995 Actinobolina vorax (WENRICH, 1929) KAHL, 1930 - FOISSNER, BERGER, BLATTERER & KOH-
MANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, U95: 246 ("Ciliate-Atlas",
that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
Actinobolina yorax serrsv LOKOT (1987) from the Lake Baikal area has an ellipsoidal macronucleus, indicating
that it is -+ Belonophrya pelagica. The population described by GELEI (1954) is distinctly smaller (60 x 50 pm)
and has only 28-31 ciliary rows, suggesting that it is -+ A. radians. Generally, this species is insufficiently de-
fined and probably a junior synonym of -+ A. radians.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 100-200 x 50-150 pm, usually 100-140 pm long; contractile by about 1/3 of body length.
2) Body ovoid (Fig. 1,4,1,17). Starving specimens fusiform.
3) Macronucleus elongate and tortuous (Fig. 1, 4,5,11,16).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end (Fig. 1, 3, 9, 10).
5) Many highly contractile tentacles, each containing a rod-shaped toxicyst (10 x 0.8 pm) in distal end, within
ciliary rows. Fully extended tentacles up to several times as long as body (Fig. 1,2,4, 12-15, 18-20); con-
tracted tentacles form ring-like array in mid-body (Fig. 3, 6,9,17). No symbiotic green algae.
6) 30-60 meridional to slightly spiral ciliary rows composed of short (2 pm) and long (20 pm) cilia, which form
more or less distinct groups between the tentacles (Fig. l, 4, 12, 13-15). Dorsal brush not yet observed.
7) Oral opening in centre of anterior body end, covered by flat, circular bulge and surrounded by circumoral
ciliary row composed of rather inegularly arranged basal bodies (Fig. I , 3, 4, 1 , 10, 12, 14; details only rec-
ognizable after silver impregnation, not necessa"ry for identification).
8) Swims slowly by rotation about main body axis. When lurking for prey, it extends the tentacles and floats
horizontally with slowly moving cilia.
Similar species
Difficult to separate from -+ A. radians, which is usually smaller (65-90 pm long) and has f'ewer (about 30 vs.
30-60), more spirally arranged ciliary rows. -+ Actinobolina wenrichii has two macronuclear nodules and, like
-+ A. smalli, symbiotic green algae. -+ Belonophrya pelagica has a broadly ellipsoidal macronucleus and is dis-
tinctly smaller (<70 pm). At low magnification, Actinobolina species should not be confused with heliozoans and
--> suctoria, which lack cilia. 1, 3,5 (no symbiotic green algae),6 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Mainly planktonic in stagnant waters throughout the year except when water
temperature is below 3' C (BICK 1972a). Among macrophytes and organic debris. Less common than -+ A. radi-
ans. WENRICH (1929b) discovered Actinobolina vorax in the pond of the Botanical Garden of the University of
118

Gymnostomatea
Pennsylvania, USA, where it appeared in considerable numbers during May. Further records substantiated by il-
lustrations: eutrophic pond at Salzburg University (Fig. 7-16); common but always sparse in road puddles,
meadow puddles and field puddles of Bavaria, Germany (DINGFELDER 1962); rare in bogs of Germany (pH
5.2-5.8) and Switzerland (MAYER 1998, PENARD 1922); Tibet (SHEN 1983). Records not substantiated by il-
lustrations: up to 6000 ind. 1-r in a eutrophic pond in Bonn, Germany, almost throughout the year (WILBERT
1969); polytrophic lake (Meerfelder Maar) in Germany (PACKROFF 1992,PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991);
l13 ind.l' (3m) and 134 ind.lr (6 m) in a eutrophic lake (Plußsee) in Germany during October (RECK 1987);
benthic in the polluted Hamburg Harbour, Germany (BARTSCH & HARTWIG 1984); experimental rice paddy
irrigated with water from the Po River, Italy (MADONI 1988); polluted water in Italy during April and May
(CANELLA 1954); winter plankton of a Ukrainian pond (KOVALCHUK & SVINTSOVA 1994); reservoirs in
the USSR (BELOVA 1989,1994, KRAVCHENKO 1969); spawning pond in the Tashkent region, Uzbekistan
(MIRABDULLAEV 1989); Tibetan Plateau (WANG 1911); China (SHEN & GU 1965); Louisiana and littoral
of Mountain Lake, Virginia, USA (BAMFORTH 1963, BOVEE 1960); waters near Mexico City (PEREZ REY-
ES & SALAS GOMEZ 196l); among organic debris in the Pantanal of Brazil (HARDOIM & HECKMAN 1996,
HECKMAN 1998). HUL (1987) found A. vorax in the seston of alphamesosaprobic sites of the Lyna River, Po-
land. Occasionally terrestrial (BOVEE 1979, FOISSNER 1998).
Autecological data: Feeds on ciliates (especially -+ Halteria), rotifers (Keratella cochlearis, Fig. 1; DINGFEL-
DER 1962, WENRICH 1929b), and algae (KAHL 1930, FOISSNER et al. 1995); possibly, the latter are in-
gested via the preyed animals, which are paralysed by the extrusome-armed tentacles and then swallowed
(DINGFELDER 1962). Biomass of 106 specimens about 250 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1995). RECK (1987) found
A. vorax in the eutrophic Plußsee at 9.5-13.5" C, pH 8.2-8.3, 5.0-8.0 mg I I Oz (44-16 7o saturation). BELOVA
(1989) observed it at 16.2-22.4" C.
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Eurasia only. Euplanktonic in lakes and ponds throughout the
year, preferring the warm seasons. Preys upon ciliates and rotifers. Saprobic classification according to FOISS-
NER et al. (1995): oligosaprobic (o =7, b = 3, I = 4, SI = 1.1).
OE OE
OB
TT
TT
MA
MA
TT
,]L
Actinobolina vorax (1-3, 6, fiom WENRICH 1929b; 4,
from DINGFELDER 1962;5, from PENARD 1922. 1,2,
4, 5, in vivo; 3, 6, various stains). l, 4: Lateral views of
representative, ovoid specimens, 110 pm, 75-150 pm.
Note the ingested rotifer (l).2: Extended tentacle with a
l0 prm long extrusome in distal end. 3, 6: Longitudinal
and transverse section showing ring-like array formed by
the retracted tentacles in mid-body. 5: Almost globular
specimen, 120-140 prm. CV - contractile vacuole, E -
extrusomes, MA = vermiform macronucleus, OB = oral
basket, OE = oral bulge, TT = tentacles.
tt9

Gymnostomatea
ffiiH
W
Actinobolina vorax (7-13, fiorr FOISSNER et al. 1995. 7, in vivo bright field rnicrograph; 8-10, 12, 13, in vivo interference contrast micro-
graphs; 11, methyl green-pyronin stain).7: Ovoid specimen with almost completely retracted tentacles. 8-10: Slightly squeezed specimens
showing oral basket (Fig. l0) and many retracted tentacles forming a ring-like sfucture in mid-body (Fig. 9). Arrows in (9) mark the ends of
an extrusome (toxicyst) in the distal portion of a retracted tentacle. 11: Macronucleus. 12, 13: The partially retracted tentacles (according to
WENRICH 1929b about 30 per ciliary row), each containing a l0 pm long extrusome (toxicyst; arows) in the distal end, are within the ciliary
rows. The somatic cilia are of different length (2)0 pm) and form small groups (arrowhead) within the rows. CO = circumoral ciliary row,
CV = contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes (toxicysts), MA = macronucleus, OB = oral basket, TT = tentacles.
t20

Gymnostomatea
#
{\
§
ff:",'',,to',"'t''
..M,.fWfi * r' " _ fr.,
Actinobolina vorax (14-16, fiom FOISSNER et al. 1995. 14, 15, protargol impregnation; 16, interf'erence conrrasr micro-
graph of preserved specimen). 14, 15: Ciliary pattem in anterior body portion. The meridional to slightly spiral ciliary rows
are composed ofclusters (arrowheads) ofbasal bodies bearing cilia ofdifferent length (cp. Fig. 13). The rather irregularly ar-
ranged basal bodies of the circumoral ciliary row have about 4 pm long cilia. The about l0 pm long extrusomes (toxicysts)
in the distal portion ofthe tentacles stain intensely and frequently become curved due to the preparation procedure. 16: Opti-
cal section showing long, tortuous macronucleus and contractile vacuole in posterior body end. The long macronucleus eas-
ily and unequivocally separates A. vorax and -+ A. radians from -+ Belonophrya pelagica whose nucleus is ellipsoidal. CO =
circumoral ciliary row composed ofirregularly arranged basal bodies, CV = contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes (toxicysts),
MA = tortuous macronucleus. TT = tentacles.
r2t

Gymnostomatea
Actinobolina vorax \from MAYER 1998. ll-20, in vivo intert'erence contrast micrographs of specimens tlorn a bog poncl in
Germany). 17: Ellipsoidal specimen with retracted tentacles forming ring-like array in mid-body. 100 x 65 pm. 18, 1.9: Pos-
terior polar views of lurking specimens. Note the enormous length of the tentacles. 20: Anterior body half with oral opening
(arrow) and extended tentacles. Note the vacuolate cytoplasm. C = somatic ci1ia, TT = tentacles.
122

Gymnostomatea
Actinobolirua wenrichü wANG & NrE , ts33
Ig24 Actinobolus radians STEIN - FAURE-F'REMIET, Bull.
biol. Fr. Belg. Suppl.,6: 17 (misidentification).
1933 Actinobolina wenrichii W ANG & NIE, Contr. biol. Lab.
Sci. Soc. China, 10: 10.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 80-125 x 30-55 pffi, floating specimens
60-90 pm long.
2) Body ovoid to bottle-shaped, that is, anterior portion some-
times narrowed (Fig. 1-3).
3) 2 globular macronuclear nodules near mid-body (Fig. 1-3).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end (Fig. 1-3).
5) Many highly contractile tentacles, each containing a rod-
shaped toxicyst in distal end, within ciliary rows.
Fully extended tentacles about as long as body
(Fig. 1-3) . Zoochlorellae present (Fig. 1-3).
6) About 18-20 meridional ciliary rows, likely
composed as in + A. yorax (Fig. 1-3). Dorsal
--o
B
brush not yet observed.
t) Oral opening in centre of anterior body end, cov- TT
ered by flat bulge (Fig. 1-3). Oral ciliature not SA
yet studied, likely as in + A. vorax (not neces-
sary for identification).
8) Swims with retracted tentacles. When lurking for
prey, it extends the tentacles and floats in a hori-
zontal position.
Similar species
Easy to separate from all other -+ Actinobolina spe-
+
cies and from Belonophrya pelagica by the bipar-
tite macronucleus. Furthermore, all lack symbiotic 2
green algae, except for + A. smalli. 3 and 5 (tenta-
Actinobolina wenrichü in vivo ( 1, 3, fiom WANG & NIE 1933; 2,
cles and symbiotic green algae present) are key char- from CURDS 1982 redrawn from FAURE-FREMIET 1924).1: Lurk-
acters for identification. ing specimen with extended tentacles, 57 pm. 2, 3: Specimens with
partially retracted tentacles,60-124pm,80-95 pm.C = somatic cilia,
Ecology CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronuclear nodules, OB = oral bas-
ket, SA = symbiotic algae, TT = tentacles.
Occurrence and distribution: Very rare, plank-
tonic in ponds and lakes. The locus classicus of A. wenrichii is in Nanking, China, where WANG & NIE (1933)
found it frequently in several ponds during spring and winter. feUnE-f'nBMIET (1924) observed it in the Oise
valley in France. No further records known.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Probably feeds on heterotrophic protists. Biomass of 106 middle-
sized specimens 90 mg. Reliably recorded from Europe and Asia only. Very rare, euplanktonic in stagnant waters.
t23

Gymnostomatea
Belonophrya pelngica aN»RB, tst+
1914 Belonophrya pelagica ANDR6, Revue suisse Zool.,22: 182.
1998 Actinobolina radians - MAYER, Mikrokosmos, 87: 131 (misidentification).
Taxonomy and identification
Following KAHL (1930), Belonophrya pelagica has been widely considered as junior synonym of -+ Actinobo-
lina radians. However, CORLISS (1979) maintained the genus, and JANKOWSKI (1980) even raised it to sub-
ordinal rank. ANDRß Ogt+) separated Belonophrya from -+ Actinobolina by the short, almost immobile tenta-
cles.
MAYER (1998) and we found a planktonic ciliate, which is similar to Belonophrya pelagica in body size (length
about 50 pm) and, especially, the ellipsoidal macronucleus. The tentacles, however, are short only in swimming
or disturbed cells and become very long in specimens lurking for prey. In this context, it is important to know
,1914)
that ANDRE observed only specimens from samples which were concentrated by centrifugation (2050 ro-
tations for 2V22 seconds)! Centrifugation causes, according to our experience, a more or less great distortion of
most euplanktonic ciliates, and some even die a few minutes later. Thus, it is understandable that ANDRE's
specimens became inflated and did not extend the tentacles (Fig. 1a). Furthermore, this species extends the tenta-
cles less frequently than -+ Actinobolina vorax (MAYER 1998).
These observations suggest, as proposed by KAHL (1930), considering Belonophrya as junior synonlm of -+
Actinobolina. However, the population we identified as .8. pelagica lacks (or it did not impregnate) the ring-like
tentacle array in mid-body, which is so characteristic for -+ Actinobolina vorax, -+ A. smalli, and an Actinobo-
lina sp. (probably smalli) contained in the same slides. Furthermore, the exploded toxicysts have a conspicuous,
Iantem-shaped anterior end, which is distinctly different from the rounded end found in another Actinobolina
species (probably smalli) contained in the same slides (Fig. 5, 6). Thus, we maintain Belonophrya, but emphasize
that electron microscopic investigations are required to determine its status. At least the species pelagica must be
maintained and neotypified because it is different from all described Actinobolina species, mainly by the ellipsoi-
dal macronucleus.
Improv ed di agno s i s: Sizeinvivo about50x30pm; ovate. Macronucleusbroadlyellipsoidaltoreni-
form. Exploded toxicysts lantern-shaped in preserved specimens. About 7 tentacles in each ciliary row. 26 clliary
rows on average.
N e o ty pe m at eri al: Two slides withprotargol-impregnated specimens fromthepond atSalzburg Uni-
versity have been deposited in the Oberösterreichische Landesmuseum in Linz (LI), Austria. The slides contain
many specimens, with relevant cells marked by a black ink circle on the cover glass.
D i f f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (detailed morphometric data, see Table on next page)
1) Size in vivo 40-70 x 25-35 pm, usually about 50 x 30 pm; slightly contractile.
2) Body usually ovate (Fig. lb, 12) or ellipsoidal (Fie. 22, 26, 31, 33), occasionally and when contracted almost
globular (Fig.16,27).
3) Macronucleus broadly ellipsoidal (in vivo about 20 x 14 pm) to slightly reniform, rarely almost globular.
Usually one large, hyaline micronucleus attached to or near macronucleus (Fig. 1, 3,J,12, 13,2I,26,21).
4) Contractilevacuoleinposteriorbodyendwithseveralexcretorypores(Fig. 1,7,8, 12, 15,21).
124

Gymnostomatea
s) About 7 regularly spaced, highly contractile tentacles within each ciliary row (Fig. I, |J,22,34); individual
tentacles up to 120 pm long, contain an extrusome (toxicyst) at or near distal end, most withdrawn into body
proper in swimming and/or disturbed cells (Fig. 1,9, 12-18,31-33); do not form ring-like array in mid-body
as, for instance, in -+ Actinobolina vorax. Toxicysts rod-shaped, 5-7 pm long, highly refractile, in body
proper and at or near distal end of tentacles (Fig. 1, 9, 12-25), conspicuously lantern-shaped (lanceolate or
rod-shaped in the scanning electron microscope, Fig. 23-25, 3l , 32) when exploded (partially?) and impreg-
nated with protargol (Fig. 5, 7,10,26,29,30). No symbiotic green algae, but sometimes containing green in-
clusions (ANDRE 1914, RIGGENBACH 1922), possibly prey remnants.
6) 23-30, usually 26 slightly spiral ciliary rows composed of short (2 pm) and long (15 pm) cilia, which form
more or less distinct groups between the tentacles; rows loosely ciliated at anterior end, oral area thus
sparsely and irregularly ciliated (Fig. 1, 3,7,8, 10, 15, 28,29,31). At least one dorsal brush row with paired,
minute bristles (Fig. 3, 10, 11, 19,20,32,35,37;half as long as body in Salzburg neotype population, as long
as body in Australian specimens; not necessary for identification).
1) Oral opening in centre of anterior body end, covered by flat, circular oral bulge and surrounded by circumoral
ciliary row composed of narrowly spaced basal bodies. Oral basket conical, composed of many fine rods (for
details on oral structures, see explanation to Figures 14,7 , 10, 12,2+-29, 36; exact structure of oral appara-
tus only recognizable after silver impregnation and not necessary for identification).
8) Swims slowly and with retracted tentacles. When lurking for prey, it extends the tentacles and floats with
slowly moving cilia (Fig. 14-16,33).
Table: Morphometric data from Belonophrya pelagica.
Characterl Mean M SD SE CV Min Max n
Body, length 4L.t 42 4.9 1.1 t2.0 34 53 T9
Body, width 3t.4 3l 2.6 0.6 8.2 26 35 t9
Oral basket, diameter at opening 1.5 8 1.0 0.2 t3.6 6 10 r9
Oral basket, length t2.5 T3 1.8 0.4 t4.l 9 t7 t9
Macronucleus, length 17.3 l1 2.8 0.6 16.1 10 22 T9
Macronucleus, width 12.4 t2 1.1 0.4 13.5 9 15 t9
Macronuclear nodules, number 1.0 1 0 0 0 1 1 t9
Micronucleus, length 4.3 4 1.0 0.2 22.2 J-, 1 t7
l
Micronucleus, width 4.2 4 1.0 0.2 23.9 J-., t7
Micronuclei, number 1.0 1 0 2 T9
Ciliary rows, number 26.5 26 1.6 0.4 6.0 23 30 T9
Granule number in a ciliary row2 21 .9 2l 5.6 1.3 20.0 20 40 t9
Tentacles impregnated, number3 23.2 2l 6.3 t.4 27.2 t3 36 t9
Data based on randomly selected, protargol-impregnated and mounted specimens from neotype population. Measurements in pm. CV =
coefficient of variation hVo,M = median, Max = maximum, Mean = arithmetic mean, Min = minimum, n = number of specimens investi-
gated, SD = standard deviation, SE = standard error of mean.
Includes basal bodies and other granules.
The rather low number indicates that only tentacles with partially exploded toxicysts impregnated.
Comparison with related species
Belonophrya pelagica differs from -> Actinobolina spp. mainly by the broadly ellipsoidal macronucleus. As con-
cems body size and shape, it matches -+ A. smalli, which has zoochlorellae and a tortuous macronucleus. The
(partially?) exploded toxicysts of B. pelagicahave a conspicuous, lantern-shaped anterior end, distinctly different
from that of an Actinobolina species (probably -+ A. smalli) contained in the same slides (cp. Fig. 5, 6). Further-
more, the tentacles of B. pelagica very likely do not form a ring-like array in mid-body, which is so characteristic
r25

Gymnostomatea
for -+A. vorox, ) A. smalli, and the Actinobolina sp. contained in the same slides. 1,3,5 (tentacles, no symbi-
otic algae) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: ANDR6, ltOt+1 discovered B. pelagica in Lake Geneva (Switzerland) at depths
of 50-60m (l8th December) and, on 6th October, nearthe bottom at 305m. In May 1921, RIGGENBACH
(1922) found a bloom of this species in a mesotrophic pond near Basle (Switzerland). MAYER (1998) recorded
it from a mesotrophic pond near St. Peter in Schwarzwald, Germany (730 m above sea-level). In August l996,he
observed a bloom of small specimens (4045x25-3}pm) at 21oC water temperature and pH6.0-6.5. We
found B. pelagica in the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, where it occurred in low numbers and together
with Actinobolina sp. (probably smalli) during July and August 1997 and 1998. It occurred also in the Högl-
wörther See in Bavaria, where, however, the extrusomes were rod-shaped in the protargol preparations. Further-
more, we found B. pelagica in a soilfiitter sample from the floodplain of the Murray River in Australia, where it
occurred together with --> Teuthophrys trisulca africana; however, the Australian specimens have a longer brosse
row than those from Salzburg (Fig. 19, 20,22, 34). SCHMITZ (1986, without illustration) fotnd Belonophrya
pelagica in the aufwuchs of an artificial substrate exposed in the Rhine River, Germany.
Very likely, B. pelagica has been seen also by others: ENTZ (1882) collected specimens of -s Actinobolina radi-
ans with an ellipsoidal macronucleus in the June plankton of a pond in the Botanical Garden of Klausenburg
(Romania); ERLANGER (1890) observed specimens of -+ A. radians with an ellipsoidal macronucleus in a
rock-pool near Heidelberg, Germany; DRAGESCO (1966) reported on -+ A. radians specimens (length 85 pm)
with a globular macronucleus from a glacier pond in France (Haut Savoie); and LOKOT (1987) observdd an -+
A. vorax with a globular macronucleus in lakes of the Baikal Lake area. However, LOKOT's specimens are
100-200 pm long, indicating that it is another, probably new species.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds mainly on ciliates, for example, small -+ oligotrichs (Fig.
1b). Biomass of 106 middle-sized specimens about 1 1 mg (our calculations) . Belonophrya pelagica is a euplank-
tonic, cosmopolitan ciliate, which very likely prefers mesotrophic conditions and the warrn summer months.
r26

Gymnostomatea
_-_-_---)"- TT
I
-[,
,I
oo I
I
t\*+-,%:
§\tr;{
"r,-ffi*"
?oo' o '3S \.r%
-"!ffi-.
ATiIlIWt
\.-
\q-\.
§
d
I
.DB
aa a,r. o
roo
a
tt aa
a
aO
a
a to
t ta -giir c
x: ', t t ra2./a t aa:a p
il,P
3
Belonophrya pelagica (la, fiom ANDRE l914; lb-5, originals from Salzburg neotype population. la, b, in vivo; 2-5, protar-
gof impregnation). la, b: Lateral views of specimens with retracted and extended tentacles, cell length about 50 ,stm. 2, 4t
Structure of oral basket (cp. Figures 26--29). Basket rods originate from (possibly unciliated) basal bodies of the circumoral
row (fine rods, arrowhead) and from scattered, ciliated basal bodies around the oral opening (thick rods, arrows; oralized so-
matic kinetids). Asterisk marks inner oral basket formed by fibres within the basket. 3: Oblique anterior polar view showing
main organelles, diameter 30 pm. 5: Discharged extrusome. 6: Discharged extrusome of Actinoholina cf . smalli (original; pro-
targol impregnation). The posterior spiral is highly schematized showing that tentacles form a ring-shaped mass in mid-body
(Fig. 2 by -+Ä. smalli). C =cilia, CO =circumoral ciliary row, DB =dorsal brush, E=extrusomes (toxicysts), MA=macro-
nucleus, MI = micronucleus, OO = oral opening, TT = tentacles.
r21

Gymnostomatea
.aaa
_T
ia a aao a a T
o a
a
a a
a o )
aa t ]
o
a t a
§ ,'.-: . a. aaaa t
. a
t
a a o t
t
t
a t aa a o a o ,
a
a
a
o/
G
1
a
a
.O
f,\..'.i'i'-""ti\} TT
\
\... . .
,t a a ' - t.'ltto .. ....tttttlttt a!'. §-.t .la.a
- a aa' a-. . a a ' o t t .' .":..' -: : . . a ^. t a .. i a i't .t .r
, ' . t a - t a^ DB
I
a . . . t t r . o . I . t I . .o ' . - t. D U Ugt. -'r .. _ i./ 1/a . 2r Jt /, t/ )n . .. . . -t.. .. .' aa a ata a
oo .2 . . : . ,' . . : -l . oo .. '!.-4n.-O ., '. _- ..=_ . .$ffi a o aIa ä i.- l,,
a' to
a a
a
/r':ii'.o
;c1/ . - - : . ' . . ? , I '. .. . t 3 . 3' : . .-€,
(;:.oor.r-ol
11
Belonophryapelagica(7-10, originals tiom salzburg neotype population; ll, original li-onr Ausrraliarr populariorr. 7. tt, I0, protargol impreg-
tn iva etio lyn ' ; d9 ia' min e v teiv r o 4; 0 1 p 1 m, a ' f Ate rr r oa w s c man an rkin sg ee xl ce rc et tr oo rn y m poic rr eo sg r oa fp ch o). n t7 ra, c8 ti: l eL a vte ar ca ul o la en .d N p oo test e inri eo gr up lo al ra r a rv raie nw g eo mf ere np t r oe fs ce in lit aa ti (v be a ss ap l e bc oim de ien ss ), wle itn hg inth , r ore ws sp .e 9c- :
cIS a uu r rf va oic e re aw v ( ci de iliw a iam rs yeh to re ow r wi 3n 5g p fl o m no a)s re s ohc woo w lr yt ii nc sa g pl asg cc er aa dtn t eu brel aa d st i ao a ln n b, d l do lo in eog ss .e a n aä rr r os a wh no g sr e t mmso e am n rkta o sti f hc occ ril ti il ai ra e, ( ba ia os s aw sl e wbll o ita d h-s ie p psa a) r ia rt ei ra o dl u ly bn adc o o an r lt ar ba l oc o dt pe ieed sn ,t i e n pn g ot ,a swc sl ihe bs i lc y. h l b0 i es: oso nub grl ri iq no guu ne d oea dn te b er y io ar rcp sio ar--
m l o r o A r g n s l t th d o l
Dbr Bus =h d' o1 r1 s: a A lbr rra un sg he ,Em =en et x to ruf ste on mta ec sle .s G a =n gd r ac nili ua l ein s ,A Mu As =tr mali aa cn r op nop uu cl la et uio sn ,. M c l= = m s ico rm onat uic c lc ei ulia s, , oC oo = o= r ac li orc pu em no inra gl , Tb Tas =a tl e b no tady c lero sw ., cR = ciliary row,
128

Gymnostomatea
'*ffi
ffi
W
X&.W*4
,r,.ffi
ffi
ffiiffii
ffiW:
ffi
ffi
.*rWffin
'rrm%W
,ru
ffi
"'rffiffi,
Belonophrya pelagica (frorrr P. MAYER 1998. In vivo interl'erence coutrasl micrographs of specimens lront a pond in Cer-
many). L2, 13: Slowly swimming, slightly distorted specimens (length about 60 pm) with almost completely retracted tenta-
cles. Such specimens were very likely studied by ANDRE (1914; Fig. 1a), who concentrated specimens by centrifugation and
thus obsenred only distorted cells with retracted tentacles. Note the ellipsoidal to reniform macronucleus, that is, the main spe-
cies character. L4-16: Polar and lateral views of floating, lurking specimens. Note the long tentacles each containing a highly
refractile toxicyst. Amowheads mark excretory pores of contractile vacuole. C = somatic cilia, CV = contractile vacuole, E =
extrusomes (toxicysts), MA = macronucleus, OB = oral basket, TT = tentacles.
129

Gymnostomatea
Belonophrya pelagica (17 , I 8, r'nicloglaphs of live specimens fiom the German population investigated by MAYER 1998; I 9, 20, scanning
electron micrographs of Australian specimens). 17: Surface view showing tentacles within ciliary rows. Each tentacle contains a 5-7 pm long
extrusome. 18: Middle divider with contractile vacuole (CV) of anterior daughter in mid-body. 19, 20: The dorsal brush consists of minute,
paired cilia. The tentacles, which are almost completely retracted, are regularly spaced within the ciliary rows. The specimens were partially
deciliated to show the arrangement of the cilia and tentacles more clearly. C = somatic cilia, CV = contractile vacuole of anterior daughter, DB
= dorsal brush, E = extrusomes (toxicysts), MA = macronucleus, OO = oral opening, T'I = tentacles.
130

Gymnostomatea
Belonophrya pelagica (21, 22, Australian population; 23-25, Salzburg neotype population. 21, in vivo; 22 25, scanning electron mict'o-
graphs). 21: Slightly squeezed specimen showing the species-specific, ellipsoidal macronucleus. 22: Overview showing about 7 tentacles
(arrowheads) within each ciliary row. 23r 252 T\e tentacles become lanceolate when the extrusome explodes within. Arrows mark widely
spaced cilia of circumoral row.24. Anterior polar view showing the flat, circular oral bulge surrounded by widely spaced and rather irregu-
larly arranged cilia. CV = contractile vacuole, DB = dorsal brush, E = extrusomes within tentacles, FG = fat globules, MA = macronucleus,
OE = oral bulge, TT = tentacles.
131

Gymnostomatea
'ffit
,:r.Näi,,#
OE
.T
Belonophrya pelagica (Salzburg neotype population.26-30, protargol impregnation;31,32, scanning elecrron micrographs).26-29: Over-
views and detail showing variability of body shape and main cell organelles. The conical oral basket is composed of two parts (cp. Fig. 2, 4):
(i) an outer layer ofrods (arrows), which originate from the widely and often rather irregularly arranged basal bodies around the circumoral
ciliary row (28,29), and (ii) an inner layer ofrods (arrowhead), which originate from the basal bodies ofthe circumoral row. Lines in Figure
29 matk the clustered cilia between tentacles containing toxicysts. 30: Anterior, lantem-shaped portion of an (partially?) exploded toxicyst
(cp. Fig. 29). 31: Overview showing slightly spiral course ofciliary rows. 32: Anterior portion showing many bristleJike cilia between ordi-
nary cilia. Retracted tentacles are cylindroidal when the extrusome contained did not explode (cp. Fig. 23, 25). CO = circumoral basal body
row,E=extrusomes(toxicysts),MA=macronucleus,Ml=micronucleus,,OB=oralbasket,OE=oral bulge,TT=tentacles.
132

Gymnostomatea
W
jN
W
NW
Ss§i$$§§§ss's8sW§g§sss$ w
E\:W
ss\rs§§ss§N{$ssN\ss4tt§§s8t
W
N
W§\\\i.
WN:W
w-"rw-,iWE
$W§§Nes*$§§wm§sffi
§Wssss§Nffi
W
W
§s§§ssüs&si§s$ssffi
8 lWrs§Nss§rsss4§$B 8
W
iW
wNNi§fs:iw"l; H TNrr§ll*rMi\\M
It§§MN fV fA irc
Belonophrya pelagica (Australiar.r population. 3-3, in vivo; 34-37, scanning electron micrographs).33: Floating, Iulking specirnen with ex-
tended tentacles. 34: Six to eight tentacles each (arrowheads) are within the slightly spirally coursing ciliary rows. 35-37: Partially deciliated
cells showing flat, circular oral bulge (36) and the spatial relationship between dorsal brush, tentacles, and cilia. Note lack oftentacles in dor-
sal brush row and clustered arrangement of cilia between tentacles. DB = dorsal brush, OE = oral bulge, OO = oral opening, TT = tentacles.
t33

Gymnostomatea
Genus Mesodiniur?, srErN, 1863
STEIN established Mesodinium in 1863, but included species only in 1867, namely -) M. acarus and -+ M. pulex
(CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN, 1859) originally classified in -+ Halteria. Thus, the genus has to be dated 1863
(ICZN 1985, Article 69 (a), (i),0)), whereas the species must be dated 1867. The type species is -+ M. acarus,
originally described from freshwater, whereas -+ M. pulex and three of its synonyms were originally described from
marine habitats. No Mesodinium species has ever been investigated with silver impregnation; thus, it is unknown
whether the freshwater and the marine populations belong to the same genus. Terminology of Mesodiniurz is rather
confusing. Therefore, we give schematic illustrations of Mesodinium andits supposed relative Myrionecta, showing
the main structures and terms. The ultrastructure of the curious tentacular processes of Mesodinium spp. has not yet
been investigated. Probably, it is similar to that of Myrionecta rubra (Fig. 10a-c by -+ M. pulex): each process con-
tains two rings with 14 microtubules each and extrusomes in the distal, furcate end (LINDHOLM et al. 1988). The
following key is from KRAINER & FOISSNER (1990), who revised -+ Askenasia, a closely related genus.
Key to genera of the Mesodiniidae (from KRAINER & FOISSNER 1990, stightly modified)
I Bodybroadlyfunnel-shaped;>l00pmacross . ....... +Liliimorpha GAJEVSKAJA, l928,withsinglespecies -+L.viridis(p. 164)
Bodypyriform;<<l00pmacross . ......2
2 Two ciliary girdles in anterior body half: anterior girdle composed of small ciliary tufts, which form 2 or 3 circlets in resting individuals;
middle girdle composed of large ciliary tufts, which extend posteriorly close to the trunk; posterior girdle lacking. On anterior end re-
tractableprocesses ........3
3 ciliary girdles in anterior body half: anterior girdle composed of moderately large citiary tufts; middle girdle composed of large, sickle-
shaped ciliary tufts; posterior girdle composed of long bristles. Anterior end lacks processes (Fig. I by genus section of --> Askenasia) 4
Anterior body portion larger than posterior. Usually red due to cryptophycean endosymbionts. Anterior girdle composed of groups of
square-packed ciliary tufts. Middle girdle composed of double rows of cilia arranged in zigzag. Processes distally forked. Crescent-
shaped terminal vacuole lacking (see Figure below). Marine and brackish
. . . . Myrionecta JANKOWSKI, 1976, with single species M. rubra (LOHMANN, 1908)
Anterior body portion smaller than posterior. Symbionts lacking. Anterior girdle composed of single rows of cilia. Middle girdle com-
posed ofpaired cilia. Processes pin-shaped. Crescent-shaped terminal vacuole present (see Figure below). Several freshwater and marine
species . ...... Mesodinimr STEIN, 1863
Distinct oral basket (rhabdos) comprising rods originating from circumoral basal body pairs. Middle girdle composed of single rows of
cilia. Posterior girdle composed of rows with two cilia each. Freshwater . . . . . .
...... Rhabdoaskenasia KRAINER & FOISSNER, 1990, with single species -+ R. mininta (p. 16l)
Ora[ basket rods not recognizable. Oral area encircled by circumoral wreath of paired, unciliated granules. Middle girdle composed of
double rows of cilia arranged in zigzag. Posterior girdle composed of rows with three cilia each (Fig. I by genus section of -->
Askenasia). Several freshwaterandmarinespecies ....... -+ AskenasiaBLOCHMANN, 1895
PR_
CON
AG Organization of Mesodinium
CST- (a) and Myrionecta (b). From
MG KRAINER & FOISSNER
(1990). Asterisks mark circlets
formed by ciliary tufts of ante-
rior ciliary girdle. Arrow de-
notes a bif urcation. arrow-
heads mark barbs. Note that in
Mesodinium and Myrionectl a
posterior girdle is lacking
(present in --> Askenusiu and -s Rhabdoaskcttusia). AG = anterior girdle of ciliary tufis (synonyms: bristles, cirri, compound cilia, equatorial
girdle ofcirri, pre-equatorial kinety belt, setae), CONE = anterior body portion, CST = constriction separating cone and trunk, MG = middle
girdle ofciliary tufts (synonyms: cirri, equatorial ciliary belt, equatorial kinety belt, membranelles), PR = tentacular processes in oral appara-
tus, SA = symbionts, TRUNK = posterior body portion (flask), VA = crescent-shaped terminal vacuole of unknown function.
134

Gymnostomatea
Mesodinium acarus srEIN, 1867
1861 Mesodinium acarus STEIN, Organismus der Infusionsthiere II, p. 148 (without illustration; -+ nomencla-
ture).
l88l Mesodinium phialinzm MASKELL, Trans. Proc. N. Z.Inst.,20: 12 (synonym according to KAHL 1930).
1930 Mesodiniumacarus STEIN, 1862- KAHL, TierweltDtl., 18: 127 (revision).
1987 Mesodinium acarus * TAMAR, Acta Protozool.,26:213 (redescription from life; division).
1992 Mesodinium acarus -TAMAR, Arch. Protistenk., l4l: 299 (comparison with -s M. pulex).
1995 Mesodinium acarus STEIN, 1867 - FOISSNER, BERGER, BLATTERER & KOHMANN, Informations-
berichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll95:251 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and
ecological monograph).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
Nomenclature, see genus section. Mesodinium acarus is separated from --> M. pulex by rather subtle differences
(-+ similar species). We follow TAMAR (1987, 1992), a specialist on the group, who recognizes both species.
We use only his data for the differential diagnosis because all other identifications are uncertain and do not allow
a reliable separation. Mesodinium phialinum MASKELL, 1887 (Fig. 5, 6) is a little known junior synonym of M.
acarus. The second synonym proposed by KAHL (1930), M. fimbriaturz STOKES, 1887d (Fig. 3, 12-14), is
very likely a distinct species (TAMAR 1971; -+ similar species).
D i f f e re n t i a 1 d i a g n o s i s (forterminology, see genus section)
1) Size in vivo 12-20 x 8-15 pm, usually about l5 pm long.
2) Body pyriform, divided by a constriction into a truncated anterior cone and a globular trunk (Fig. 1,2,8).
3) One (possibly two as in --> M. pulex) globular macronucleus near mid-body (Fig. 5; has to be confirmed; dif-
ficult to recognize, not necessary for identification).
4) Two tiny contractile vacuoles in basal region of cone (Fig. 2; difficult to recognize. not necessary for identifi-
cation). Terminal vacuole indistinct, misidentified as contractile vacuole by some older authors (Fig. 1, 5).
s) No extrusomes have been described (but see character 7).
6) Two distinct ciliary girdles, each consisting of about 16-25 short rows, in constricted body area: (i) anterior
girdle composed of ciliary tufts, which form, in individuals at rest, two circlets (an oblique-anteriorly and a
laterally directed circlet); each circlet composed of about 8-13, circa l0 pm long ciliary tufts, which are bi-
furcated distally for about half of their length and lack barbs (Fig.2,8); (ii) middle girdle composed of ciliary
tufts, which are attached, when not beating, to the trunk and thus difficult to recognize (Fig.2,8-1 l). Poste-
rior girdle and dorsal brush lacking.
7) Oral apparatus occupies truncated anterior end; unciliated, but with up to 8 pin-shaped processes (see genus
section for brief ultrastructural description), which can be extruded individually or as a circlet from around
the periphery of the cytostome (Fig. 8).
8) Typically in motion, constantly performing forward spiralling ("crawling") intemrpted by backward jumps.
Terminates forward spiralling, and is inactive momentarily, before jumping backward.
Similar species
Freshwater specimens of -+ M. pulex are laryer (25-3O pm long) and the 23-34 ciliary tufts of the anterior girdle
form 3 circlets in resting specimens. An easier character is seen in polar view, where >25 ciliary tufts are recog-
nizable in -+ M. pulex and usually <25 inM. acarus (Fig..9-11). Mesodiniumfimbriatum STOKES, 1887d (Fig.
135

Cymnostomatea
3, 12-14, redescription in TAMAR 1971) has, like M. acarus, an anterior girdle with about2l ciliary tufts,
which, however, have barbs and form 3 circlets. The marine M. velox TAMAR, 1986, which has, like M. acarus,
only 2 circlets, possesses a very prominent tubular oral process (Fig. 7). Myrionecta rubra (LOHMANN, 1908)
JANKOWSKI, 1916 (previously Mesodinium rubrum; see LINDHOLM 1985), which occurs only in marine and
brackish biotopes, is usually dumb-bell shaped and red due to symbiotic cryptophyceans; furthermore, the ciliary
pattern is different, that is, the anterior girdle is composed of minute, ciliary patches (Fig. 10a--c by --> Mesodin-
ium pulex). Inexperienced workers should not confuse Mesodinium with -+ Askenasia (usually >30 pm long,
ciliary tufts of middle girdle sickle-shaped, posterior girdle of long bristles present), Rhabdoaskenasia
(20-35 pm, cilia of middle girdle sickle-shaped, posterior girdle of long bristles present, thick extrusomes in oral
basket), and -+ Halteria and --> Pelagohalteria (usually >25pm, body globular, anterior end with conspicuous
membranelles). 1, 2, 6 (anterior girdle of <25 clliary tufts forms 2 circlets), 7 are key characters for
identification.
Ecology
Note the --> taxonomic problems when interpreting the ecological data; probably sometimes confused with the
very similar and common -+ M. pulex or M. fimbriatum (-+ similar species).
Occurrence and distribution: Throughout the year common in the pelagial and mud of stagnant and running
waters, sometimes peaking during autumn (BICK & KUNZE 1971, FOISSNER et al. 1995). In marine habitats
less common than -+ M. pulex. STEIN (1867) discovered M. acarus in marshy waters near Prague, Czech Re-
public, and near the village of Niemegk in the vicinity of Berlin, Germany. Locus classicus of the synonym M.
phialinum is Otaki, New Zealand (MASKELL 1887). Records substantiated by illustrations: saline pcinds and
ditches near Hamburg, Germany (KAHL 1928); pond near Geneva, Switzerland, during February and May
(ROUX 1901); freshwater canals and ponds (up to 31" C) in the Everglades, Florida, USA (TAMAR 1987);ma-
rine sediments from Mexico (ALADRO LUBEL 1985).
Records not substantiated by illustrations: pond and font in a cemetery in Tyrol, Austria (DALLA TORRE
l89l); very sparse in a eutrophic, stagnant water in Vienna, Austria, during February and May (HELD 1937);
mesosaprobic waters (15'C) in Belgium during May (BERVOETS 1940); various habitats in Czechoslovakia
(MORAVCOVA tsll); ponds in England (CRAIGIE 1921); Estonia (JACOBSON 1928); pond in France dur-
ing July (BOURQUIN-LINDT 1919); sporadically in the mud of the Hamburg Harbour, Germany (BARTSCH
& HARTWIG 1984); stagnant water in Rostock, Germany (LEVANDER 1892); pond during February and
March, and other sites in Hungary (KREPUSKA 1911" 1930); peat-bogs and moor-pools in Ireland (DUN-
KERLY 1913); benthic and pelagic in lakes and a reservoir in Italy (FEHLMANN 1912, LONGHI 1892,1894,
MADONI l99la); benthic and among macrophytes in Polish fishponds, reservoirs and rivers (CZAPIK 1959,
GRABACKA 1911, 1985, KRZYZANEK & KRZYZANEK 1986, KWIATKOWSKA-GRABACKA 1964,
1965); from surface to near sediment (60m) in Lake Geneva, Switzerland (ANDRE 1914, 1916); rare among
floating algae in Lake Annecy and in ponds of Switzerland during June and December (LE ROUX 1907, RIG-
GENBACH 1922); pond in the Botanical Garden of Bern, Switzerland, during July (SAKOWSKY-CAMPIONI
1906); Azerbaijanian reservoirs with a peak (120 ind. 1-r) in the surface layer (ALEKPEROV 1983, 1984a); cool-
ing plant of a Moldavian power station (CHORIK & VIKOL l9l3); Lake Balkhash, Kazakhstan (TROSHINA
1994); Ladoga Lake, Russia (KUSTOVLYANKINA 1990); ponds, mesotrophic and eutrophic reservoirs in the
ussR ((DoBRovLrANSKt 1914, KORNTYENKO 1912, MORDUKHAJ-BOLTOVSKAJA 1965, NEBRAT
1980, 1991, OLEKSIV 1985, ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992); Reelfoot Lake, littoral of Douglas Lake, and pond
in the USA (BEVEL 1938, CAIRNS et al. 1973, NIEDERLEHNER & CAIRNS 1992);Brazll (CUNHA 1913,
1916, 1918, PROWAZEK 1910).
Many benthic and planktonic records from running waters (see FOISSNER et al. 1995 for detailed listing):
brooks in Upper Austria (BLATTERER 1994); in the mud of the clean Illach River, Bavaria (FOISSNER 1997);
common in a beta- to alphamesosaprobic experimental torrent in Italy (MADONI 1980, MADONI & GHETTI
1980); Latvian rivers (LIEPA 1978); Pripyat River and periphytic and pelagic in the Tisa River, Ukraine (KO-
VALCHUK 1991, 1991a, NEBRAT 1992); Yolga River (MAMAEVA l9l9b); San Joaquin River, Cape Fear
t36

Gymnostomatea
near Fayetteville, River Rock Creek, and New River, USA (ALLEN 1920, CAIRNS & YONGUE 1973, PAT-
RrcK 1961, YONGUE & CATRNS 1979).
Also recorded from groundwater in Czechoslovakia (MORAVCOVÄ 1986) and from marine habitats (LACKEY
& LACKEY 1970, MADRAZO-GARIBAY & LÖPEZ-OCHOTERENA 1985, SMITH 1904, WEBB 1956).
There are many records of "Mesodinium sp.", not substantiated by illustrations, from freshwater, strongly indi-
cating that it either was M. acqrus or the freshwater form of -+ M. pulexi evtrophic, shallow urban lake in Vi-
enna, Austria (MAYER et aL. 1997); mesotrophic, alpine lake (Mondsee) in Austria (SALBRECHTER &
ARNDT 1994); mesotrophic Lake Windermere and small productive lake (Esthwaite) in England
(LAYBOURN-PARRY & ROGERSON 1993, LAYBOURN-PARRY et al. 1990); mud of Loch Leven, Eng-
land (BRYANT & LAYBOURN 1974); dominant in the 10-15 m zone of the humic, moderately acidic (pH
5.1-7.5) Lake Vassiviöre (Central Massif of France) from April to October (AMBLARD et al. 1995, CARRIAS
et al. 1994); Lake Nantua, France (AMBLARD et al. 1994 biomass of 19 mg per 106 individuals indicates mis-
identification); up to 43 ind.l-' in a eutrophic lake (Belauer See) in northern Germany (ZIMMERMANN 1994);
Danube River in Hungary (BERECZKY & NOSEK 1994); tp to 1000 ind. l-r in the warm, meso-eutrophic, mo-
nomictic Lake Kinneret,Israel, during autumn, winter and spring (HADAS & BERMAN 1998, MADONI 1990);
in the mud of Azerbaijanian lakes (ALIEV 1982); in ice from ponds near Moscow, Russia (SERNOV 1929);
Lake Onega, Russia (MAZHEIKAITE 1969); Ukrainian reservoir (NEBRAT 1975); pond water in Japan
(SUDZUKI l98l); very abundant during mid- to late-stratification in Lake Huron and Lake Michigan, USA
(CARRICK & FAHNENSTIEL 1990, LAVRENTYEV etal. 1995); up to 0.lgm-2 (wet mass of preserved
specimens) in Lake Ontario, Canada, during late April (TAYLOR & HEYNEN 1987); eutrophic Upton Lake and
Tyrrel Lake, Lake Oglethorpe (1000 ind.l-r in the epilimnion from May to October), Lake Okoboji, and Castle
Lake in the USA (PACE 1982, PACE & ORCUTT 1981, PACE & VAQUE 1994, PACE et al. 1990, §eN»gnS
et al. 1989, SHAWHAN et al. 1941, WIACKOWSKI et aI. 1994a); freshwater in Connecticut, USA (CONN
1905); Bowland Lake, Canada, after neutralization (KELLER et al. 1992); dominant (1300 ind. I r) in a Mexican
maar crater lake during January (MACEK etal.1994); freshwater of Tahiti (EDMONDSON 1910).
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria, flagellates, small algae and ciliates, and organic debris (BICK & KUNZE
1971;BALLARD 1952, possibly M.fimbriatumbecause l8 tufts form 3 circlets, -+ similar species). Biomass of
106 specimens 1.5 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1995), according ro NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK (1991) 7 mg.
WIACKOWSKI et al. (1994a) showed that Mesodinium and -+ Halteria were least depressed by crustacean zoo-
plankton, followed by -+ Askenasia, -+ Uroticha, Stobilidium and Stombidium. NIEDERLEHNER &
CAIRNS (1990) found M. acarus in laboratory tests, which were conducted to evaluate the chronic effects of in-
creased acidity on protozoan communities, only at alkaline (pH 8.36 and 7.61) conditions. MATIS & STRA-
KOVÄ-STRIESKOVÄ (1991) observed M. acarus in thermal lakes of Czechoslovakia at740.5" C and at pH
5.5-6.7 . Further autecological data according to the literature review by BICK & KUNZE (l9l l): 2-l 8.5' C, pH
6.4-:7 .2,8.8-11.1 mg 1-r Oz, 6.6-16.0 mg 1-r COzr.*. TAMAR (1987) found dividing specimens at 30o C (Fig. a).
Ecological summary: Very likely cosmopolitan because recorded from Europe, Asia, North America and South
America. Pelagic and benthic in stagnant and running freshwaters; marine records doubtful. Omnivorous and
common at all trophic levels and during all seasons, that is, eurythermic. Saprobic classification according to
FOISSNER et al. (1995): betamesosaprobic (o = 2,b = 6, a= 2,I = 3, SI = 2.0).
t37

Gymnostomatea
AG
CV
/
I
MA
I
#G
I
Mesodinium acarus in vivo ( l, f rom KAHL 1930 redrawn f}om ENTZ; 2, 4, 8, fiom TAMAR l9ti7; 5. 6, the synonynr M. ltltiulittunt lrorn
MASKELL 1887; 9, 10, from FOISSNER et al. 1995; I l, original of a freshwater population from the USA, kindly supplied by H. TAMAR,
Indiana State University). l, 5,6: Lateral views and polar view, 30 pm, l8 pm. 2, 4: Yotng postdivider and very late divider. The contractile
vacuoles were drawn in by FOISSNER et al. (1995) according to the data by TAMAR (1987). Arrows mark distal bifurcation, asterisks de-
note the 2 circlets formed by the ciliary tufts ofthe anterior girdle. 8-11: Lateral view and polar views. When observed laterally, the ciliary
tufts of the anterior girdle form two circlets (three in --> Mesodinium pulex and M. fimbriatum). However, an easier character is seen in polar
view, where >25 clliary tufts are recognizable in -+ M. pulex and usually <25 rn M. acarus.
Mesodinium fimbriatum in vivo (3, from KAHL 1930 redrawn from STOKES 1887d; 12-14, from TAMAR 197 l).3,12-14: Lateral views,
22pm, l7-18 pm. Arrows mark distal bifurcation, asterisks denote the 3 circlets formed by the ciliary tufts of the anterior girdle (versus 2
circlets in M. acarus,Fig. S).
Mesodinium velox (7, from TAMAR 1986) is a 10-20 pm long (without oral process) marine species with a conspicuous, tubular oral process.
AG = anterior girdle of ciliary tufts, CV = contractile vacuoles, MA = macronucleus, MG = middle girdle of ciliary tufts, PR = tentacular proc-
esses of oral apparatus, VA = vacuole.
138

Gymnostomatea
Mesodinium pulex (clepenBoE & LACHMANN, 1859) srErN, 1867
1859 Halteria pulex CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN, M6m. Inst. natn. g6nev., 6:310.
1861 Mesodinium pulex (CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN) - STEIN, Organismus der Infusionsthiere II, p. 162
(combining author).
1922 Mesodinium pulex (CL. et L.) STEIN 1862 - PENARD, Et,rdes Infusoires, p. 58 (redescription from life).
1930 Mesodinium (Halteria) pulex CLAP. u. L., 1858 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 127 (revision).
1972 Mesodinium pulex CLAPAREDE et LACHMANN, 1858 - BORROR, Acta Protozool., 10: 38 (redescrip-
tion).
1992 Mesodinium pulex CLAP. & LACHM., 1858 - TAMAR, Arch. Protistenk., 141: 284 (detailed redescrip-
tion from life and comparison with -+ M. acarus).
\995 Mesodinium pulex (CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN, 1859) STEIN, 1867 - FOISSNER, BERGER,
BLATTERER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, l/95:
260 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
Mesodinium pulex was discovered in a Norwegian fjord, that is, in a marine habitat. Halteria tenuicollis FRESEN-
IUS, 1865, Acarella siro COHN, 1866 (only 6-9 pm long! distinct species?) and Mesodinium cinctum CALKINS,
1902 are, according ro ENTZ (1S84). BÜTSCHLI (1839), CALKINS (1926) and others, junior synonyms, which
were also described from marine habitats. Later, M. pulex was frequently recorded from freshwaters worldwide.
However, detailed comparative investigations are lacking, and it might be that marine and freshwater populations
belong to different species or even genera, as also supposed by TAMAR (pers. comm.). Megatricha partita
PERTY, 1852, a well described but insufficiently illustrated, about 20 pm-sized limnetic species, is a senior syno-
nym of Mesodinium pzlex 1BÜTSCHLI 1889. RIGGENBACH 1922).It was suppressed by CORLISS (1979) to
stabilize nomenclature. However, if further investigations show that marine and freshwater populations are differ-
ent, PERTY's genus/species should be resurrected. In the differential diagnosis we use only original data from two
freshwater populations of M. pulex from Lake Placid and Lake Oglethorpe, USA, kindly supplied by H. TAMAR
(Fig. 16, 2226). A brief description of the Lake Oglethorpe population has been given by TAMAR (1986, p.
l3r).
Differential diagnosis
For terminology, see genus section! The data and micrograpfrs (FiB. 16,22-26)used in the differential diagnosis
are, unless stated otherwise, observations by H. TAMAR (Indiana State University; -+ taxonomy) on freshwater
populations from two lakes in the United States. His observations largely agree with those of PENARD (1922,
Fig. 7). For a brief ch aracterization of the marine form of M. pulex, see similar species.
1) Size in vivo 20-30 x 14-21pm.
2) Body pyriform, divided by a constriction into a truncated anterior cone and a globular trunk (Fig. 16,22-25).
3) Two tiny macronuclear nodules near mid-body (Fig. 7; not necessary for identification).
4) Two tiny (possibly contractile) vacuoles in basal region of cone (difficult to recognize, not necessary for
identification). Often a sizeable, crescent-shaped terminal vacuole (Fig. 16,2q.
5) No extrusomes have been described (but see character 7).
6) Two distinct ciliary girdles, each consisting of 23-34 (mean about 29) short rows, in constricted body area:
(i) anterior girdle composed of ciliary tufts, which form, in individuals at rest, three circlets (an oblique-
anteriorly, a laterally, and an oblique-posteriorly directed circlet); each circlet composed of about 8-1 1, circa
2V23 pm long tufts, which are bifurcated distally for about half of their length and lack barbs (Fig. 16,
139

Gymnostomatea
22-26); (ii) middle girdle composed of ciliary tufts, which are attached, when not beating, to the trunk and
thus difficult to recognize (Fig. 16, 22-26). Posterior girdle and dorsal brush lacking.
7) Oral apparatus occupies truncated anterior end; unciliated, but with up to 10 pin-shaped processes (see genus
section for brief ultrastructural description), which can be extruded individually or as a circlet from around
the periphery of the cytostome (Fig. 16,23-25).
8) Often remains motionless for several minutes with spread tufts of anterior girdle (Fig. 23, 25, 26), then
quickly darts backward for some distance. Attaches to substrates by the tentacular processes (Fig. 16, 22,24).
Similar species
In marine populations of M. pulex, the ciliary tufts of the anterior girdle bear many barbs and are not bifurcated
distally (Fig.4, 11,12,20,21).In the limnetic M.fimbriarzrn STOKES, 1887d (see Fig. 3,12-14by -+ M. acarus
and redescription by TAMAR l91l), the 2l clliary tufts of the anterior girdle, which also form three circlets, are
bifurcated and typically bear two barbs each. -+ Mesodinium acarus is often smaller (usually <20 pm) and the
barb-less ciliary tufts, form only 2 circlets. An easier character is seen in polar view, where <25 clliary tufts are
recognizable in -s M. acarus and usually >25 in M. pulex (Fig. 26). The marine M. velox TAMAR, 1986, which
has, like M. acarus, only 2 circlets, possesses a very prominent, tubular oral process (Fig. 7 by -+ M. acarus ). See
-)M.acarus forseparation of MesodiniumfromMyrionecta (Fig. 10a--c), -+Askenasia,-+Rhabdoaskenasia,-->
Halteria and -+ Pelagohalteria. l, 2, 6 (anterior girdle of >25 bifurcated and barb-less ciliary tufts forms 3 cir-
clets), 7 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Note the -+ taxonomic problems when interpreting the ecological data; probably sometimes confused with -+
Mesodinium acarus (for example , M. cf . acarus sensu LINDHOLM 1985) or M. fimbriatum (-+ similar species).
Occurrence and distribution: Common throughout the year in the pelagial and mud of limnetic and marine
habitats; in the latter more frequent than -+ M . acarus. Locus classicus of M. pulex is a fjord near Bergen, Nor-
way (CLAPAREOB & LACHMANN 1S59). The synonyms Halteria tenuicollis, Acarella siro and Mesodinium
cinctum were also discovered in sea water (FRESENIUS 1865, COHN 1866, CALKINS 1902). Only Megaticha
partita PERTY, 1852 was discovered in a freshwater biotope, namely in bogs and ponds near Bem, Switzerland,
where it was observed from September to December. Further records substantiated by illustrations: bogs in Bel-
gium (CHARDEZ 1981); common in pond and marsh water of England (KENT 1881); great numbers in stagnant
waters of Switzerland during autumn (PENARD 1922); common in the littoral among algae, and once very abun-
dant in the pelagial of Lake Baikal mainly during summer (GAJEVSKAIA 1921, GAJEWSKAJA 1933, LOKOT
1987); Tibet (SHEN 1983; very likely -+ M. acarus because the somewhat superficial illustration shows only 2
circlets); rare but very numerous in ditch water of India during May (NAIDU 1965); tidal marsh pools in New
Hampshire, USA, throughout the year (BORROR 1972a); marine habitats on the East and West Coast of the
United States (TAMAR 1979, 1992;Fig. l1-15, 17*21); Lake Placid, Florida, and Lake Oglethorpe, Georgia,
USA (TAMAR, pers. comm.; Fig. 16, 22-26); marine sediments in Mexico (ALADRO LUBEL 1985).
Records not substantiated by illustrations: clean groundwater ponds in Austria (KRAINER 1988); eutrophic pond
at Salzburg University, Austria (BLATTERER 1989); meromictic lake (Höllerersee) in Austria (NAUWERCK
1996); up to 250000 ind. l-r among the natant vegetation of a polluted floodplain pool in Czechoslovakia during
late May (LEGNER 1964); oligomesotrophic Lake Pavin, France (CARRIAS et al. 1996); mesotrophic lake
(Laacher See) in Germany (PACKROFF 1992, PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991); drainage ditches in pastures and
alder groves near Hamburg, Germany, only when not contaminated with pesticides (CASPERS & HECKMAN
1982); ponds in England (CRAIGIE l92l); peat-bog in Estonia (JACOBSON 1928); abundant in lakes (Tegeler-
see; polytrophic Heiligensee, 30 000 ind. I-' in late September) near Berlin, Germany (SKIBBE 1991, VERWORN
1889); in the pseudoperiphyton but not in the plankton of a eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Bonn, Ger-
many (WILBERT 1969); Harburger Binnenhafen, an extremely polluted harbour basin in Hamburg, Germany
140

Gymnostomatea
(HECKMAN et al. 1990); eutrophic, stagnant waters in Ferrara, Italy, during August (CANELLA 1954); rice field
supplied with water from the Po River, Italy (MADONI 1988); about 50000 ind.l-' in a heavily polluted (about
0.3 mg lr 02, 500 mg I I COD) basin of northem Italy during June (MADONI & VIAROLI 1985); benthic in Lake
Suviana, Italy (MADONI 1989); in the mud of polluted fishponds in Poland (GRABACKA l9l1); various habi-
tats in Czechoslovakia (MORAVCOVA tsll); ox-bows of Danube River in Slovak Republic and Hungary (MA-
TIS & TIRJAKOVÄ 1994b, NOSEK & BERECZKY 1981); cooling planr of a Moldavian power sration (CHO-
RIK & VIKOL 1973); common in clear, oxygen-rich waters of Switzerland, throughout the year (RIGGENBACH
1922); reservoirs in Azerbaijan, showing distinct daily vertical migration (ALEKPEROV 1984a, 1989, 1990);
from 0 to 100 m with a peak (250 ind. l-r) at about 20 m in an Azerbaijanian reservoir (ALEKPEROV 1983);
ponds, reservoirs and lakes in rhe ussR (DOBROVLIANSKI 1914, KORNIYENKO 1972, MAMAEYA 1974a,
1976a, MYLNIKOVA 1992a, NEBRAT 1980, ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992); subarctic Tundra lakes, USSR
(LAVRENTYEV 1989); Tibetan Plateau (WANG 1977);Lake Donghu and very rare in Lake Mo Chu Hu, Nan-
king, China (GONG 1986, WANG 1925); eutrophic Lake Okeechobee, Florida, throughout the year with a dis-
tinct peak (25 000 ind. lr) during November (HAVENS & BEAVER 1997); dominant with an annual mean dry
mass of 3.54.5 mg m-3 in the mesotrophic Lake Weir, Florida, USA, and common in other Florida lakes of all tro-
phic stages (BEAVER & CRISMAN 1989a, 1990); soft-water lake in Wisconsin, USA, during August (NOLAND
1925a); rare in limnetic habitats of Louisiana, USA (BAMFORTH 1963); littoral zone of Douglas Lake, USA
(PRATT et al. 1985); marsh in Michigan, USA (HENEBRY & CAIRNS 1984); Lobo Reservoir (+ Ecogram),
Brazll, throughout the year with a distinct peak(2920 ind. 11) during April and May, and dominant with up to
2080 ind.l-1 in the eutrophic Rio Grande Reservoir in March (BARBIERI & GODINHO-ORLANDI 1989a, b);
common and sometimes very abundant in the Pantanal of Mato Grosso, Brazil (HARDOIM & HECKMAN 1996,
HECKMAN 1998). Further freshwater records, see Mesodinium sp.by -) M. acarus.
Many records from running waters (fully listed in FOISSNER et al. 1995; here only some examples äre given):
Alb River at the harbour of Karlsruhe, Germany (MAUCH 1990); lowland brooks in Germany (-+ Table); Po
River, Italy (FERRARI et al. 1989); River Lyna, Poland (HUL 1987); benthic in the Danube River and the Tu-
riec River, Slovak Republic (TIRJAKOVA t,gz, 1993, SZENTIVÄNY & TIRJAKOVÄ tSS+); l11ind.1r
(spring), 101 ind. I' (summer) and 0 ind. 1-r (autumn) in the betamesosaprobic Volga River (MAMAEVA 1979,
1919b, MAMAYEVA 1975);12000 ind.l-r in the Rhode River estuary, USA (DOLAN & GALLEGOS 1991);
South River, Virginia, USA (RUTHVEN 1972); tributary of Amazon River, Colombia (BOVEE 1957).
Many records fiom inland salt waters and brackish and marine habitats, fbr example: mesopsammal, ground-
water, and rock pools at the Bulgarian Black Sea coast (DETCHEVA 1992);brackish water (4.5-:7.0Voo) inFin-
land (KIVI 1986); harbour of Bastia, Corsica (GOURRET & ROESER 1888; M. pulex var. striata with striated
cortex); brackish waters in northern Germany (AGATHA 1995, JAECKEL 1962);Ztiderzee, The Netherlands
(HOFKER 1922, WIERSMA-VERSCHAFFELT 1936); in the mud of a brackish reservoir in Poland (CZAPIK
1962);brackish pond near Barcelona, Spain, during March (MARGALEF 1948); saline (4-117oo) ponds in the
Al-Hassa Oasis, Saudi Arabia (AL-RASHEID 1996); saline lakes in the USSR (BOUTCHINSKY 1895, BUT-
SCHINSKY 1897); saline (about 10 Voo)Dev1l Lake, USA (EDMONDSON 1920); surface (1-7 cm) sediment of
a brackish marsh in the USA (ELLIOTT & BAMFORTH 1975); in the mud of saline lakes in Canada (WIL-
BERT 1995); Laguna de T6rminos, Mexico (MADRAZO-GARIBAY &L'PEZ-}CHOTERENA 1985); lagoon
at San Crist6bal, Chile (BÜRGER 1908; with illustration, possibly ) M. acarus); marine sands in Mauritania
(DRAGESCO l96s).
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria, algae, flagellates, and ciliates (BORROR 1963, BICK & KUNZE 1971,
BOCK 1960, KAHL 1930, NOLAND 1925). Clearance rate 0.06 pl h-', ingestion rate 0.15-0.32 cells h-r over a
prey concentration of 6V23OO Metanophrys ml I (DOLAN & COATS 1991). Generation time about 16 h under
laboratory conditions (20" C and the clliate Metanophrys as prey; DOLAN & COATS l99l). Does not ingest
fluoresbrite plain microspheres 0.5 pm across (CARRIAS et al. 1996). According to CHRISTOFFERSEN et al.
(1995) autotrophic, which is, however, not substantiated by other data. Biomass of 106 specimens about 3 mg
(BEAVER & CRISMAN 1982, DOLAN & COATS 1991; preserved specimens), about 5 mg (FOISSNER et al.
1995),9 mg (NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991), 10 mg (CARRIAS et al. 1996; preserved with mercuric
chloride). Carbon content about126 pg ind. r (AGATHA 1995). WIACKOWSKI et al. (1994a) showed experi-
t4t

Gymnostomatea
mentally that Mesodinium and -+ Halteria were least depressed by crustacean zooplankton, followed by -+ Aske-
nasia, --) Urotricha, Strobilidium and Strombidium. Tolerutes up to 6 Vo salt (AX & AX 1960), according to
HAMMER (1986) even up to l0 %ot Autecological data -+ Table.
Table: Autecological data of Mesodinium pulex. Co\tmn 1, from HEUSS (1976; summary of literature and original data from lowland riv-
ers in Germany); column 2, from RUTHVEN (1972) and CAIRNS & DICKSON (1972; two records with low abundances from South River,
USA); column 3, from SKIBBE ( I 99 1 ; several analyses from a polytrophic lake [Heiligensee] in Germany).
Parameters References
2 /J'l
1
Temperature (" C) 1-21 23 9.5-16
pH 6.9-9.3 B. 1 -8.2 1 .4-8.2
o, (mg I') 0-26.7 8.5-9.0
Oz (saturation 7o) 0-261 < 101
BoDs (mg I ') t .9-28.4 0.7-1.1
KMnO+-consumption (mg I ') 7-79
HzS (mg I ') 0-2.1
Coz (mg I ') 1-5 8
PO+3 -P (mg I ') 0-1.5 0.08-0.09
NH+*-N (mg I ') 0.4-2.0 0 0.02-4.1
NO: -N (mg I ') 0.1-0.39 <0.05 i
Ecological summary: Recorded from all continents, except for Australia and Antarctica. Pelagic and benthic in
marine and limnetic biotopes, holo-euryhaline. Reliable records from terrestrial habitats lacking (FOISSNER
1998). Common during all seasons, that is, eurythermic. Omnivorous. According to BEAVER & CRISMAN
(1989a), M. pulex is one of the best ciliate indicator species for assessing the trophic state of Florida lakes, as it is
almost lacking in acidic (oligotrophic) lakes and steadily increases with eutrophication. This matches the be-
tamesosaprobic classification (o = 2,b = 6, a = 2,I = 3, SI = 2.0) proposed by FOISSNER et al. (1995).
,a\-
/,\ -af
T.
25
vt
20 sz= 3 Mesod iniuB pulex
o
t5 od, t
l0 § olx 1 \ t A
Ecograms (from BAR-
BIERI & GODINHO- ,-- _ --a _/ \'b
ORLANDI I9B9b):
Seasonal distribution ol o-\
M. puler and -+ Haltc-
ria grandinella in the
Lobo Reservoir, Brazil.
from September 1984 to H gro olt ne eri io nello
October 1985. Solid
line: marginal region
with aquatic vegetation li
at a depth of about 2 m. I /;
Dotted line: near the -o I
,o
dam where the reservoir'
mis a cb roo pu ht y6 m ad re ee p a cn kc -l 2 s4 A o8 22 t N2 2 60 D3 1 2 f| 0 J7 2t 2 F7 M13 27 r A0 24 0 M8 2 0 0 J5 t7 0 J3 t7 0 A7 S1 O9 t82509 30
a te s la
te84
ing. I t985
142

Gymnostomatea
#
PR
I
iii';r\
/
2
Itl
t CONE \
i
{lir
'((((((i,({'t
TRUNK
9b
7 VA
9a
.v
.h AG
MI
i.*ot*r! I
AG
MG- §ufl AG
lu}}$ MG
MA
10b
Mesodinium puler (l ,2, from CLAPAREOE & LACHMANN 1859; 3, from GAJEWS-
KAJA 1933; 4, from TAMAR 1 986; 5 , 6, from KAHL I 930; 7 , 8, from PENARD 1922; 9a,
b, from BORROR 1912a. 1,2,5,6,9, marine specimens; 3 ,7,8, freshwater specimens. 1-8,
in vivo; 9a, b, various methods). 1-5, 7: Laleral views, 15 pm, ? [r-, 22 pm, 25 tr:m,
18-22 pm. In resting specimens, the anterior girdle forms 3 circlets (asterisks in Fig.4,5) of
ciliary tufts, which have barbs in marine populations (arrows in 4). 6: Anterior half with ex-
truded tentacular processes. 8: Middle divider. 9a, b: Ciliary pattern. In marine populations,
the anterior girdle consists of up to 49 very short (2-3 pm) rows, whose cilia form tufts; the
rniddle girdle consists of up to 43 rows of agglutinated paired cilia, which envelope the
trunk in resting specimens. AG = anterior girdle of ciliary tufts, MG = middle girdle of cili-
ary tufts, PR = tentacular processes of oral apparatus, VA - terminal vacuole of unknown
function (often misinterpreted as contractile vacuole).
Myrionecta rubra ( 10a, micrograph of live specimen from Cape Code, USA, kindly supplied
by H. TAMAR, Indiana State University; l0b, c, protargol-impregnated specimens, from
AGATHA 1995). 10a: Lateral view (bar - l0 prm), length 15-10 pm according to LIND-
HOLM (1985). Note the dumb-bell shaped body, the furcate oral processes, and the red pig-
rnentation due to symbiotic cryptophyceans (see frontispiece). 10b, c: Ciliary pattern. AG =
anterior girdle of ciliary tufts, MA = macronuclear nodules, MG = middle girdle of ciliary
tufts, MI = micronucleus, OA = oral apparatus, PR = tentacular processes of oral apparatus
(ultrastructure, see LINDHOLM et al. 1988), SA = symbiotic cryptophyceans.
t43

Gymnostomatea
Mesodinium pulax (ll-15, rnitrine speciurens, liom TAMAR 1979, 1992.16, lieshwater specimcn fl'om Lake Placid, USA, micrograph kindly
supplied by H. TAMAR, Indiana State University. In vivo dark phase contrast micrographs with flash illumination. Bars l0 pm). ll-15: Lateral
views of resting marine specimens (l l-13, [5) and backward spiralling cell (14). The ciliary tufts of the anterior girdle, which forms 3 circlets in
resting specimens, are not bifurcated, but have barbs (arrows in I I , l2). Note shape variation of anterior body portion (cone), which is separated
from the globular trunk by a + distinct constriction. The specimen shown in Figure l3 is attached to the substrate by the tentacular processes of
the oral apparatus. The ciliary tufts of the middle girdle envelope the globular trunk (15). 16: Lateral view of a resting freshwater specimen. The
ciliary tufts of the anterior girdle are bifurcated (arrows) and lack barbs (see also Fig. 22-26). AC = anterior girdle of ciliary tufts (in I I con-
fused with MG), MC = middle girdle of ciliary tufts, OA = oral apparatus, PR = tentacular processes, VA = terminal vacuole.
144

Gymnostomatea
Mesodiniuru pulex (17-21, marine specimens; fiom TAMAR 1992. In vivo dark phase contrast micrographs with flash illumination. Bars
10 pm). 17, 18: Lateral view of a resting specimen. Note the very broad anterior body portion (cone) as well as two extruded and several
resting oral processes, whose distal end is conical, funnel-shaped or globular. 19-21: Polar views of specimens with 4l (19) and 37 (20) cili-
ary tufts in the middle girdle. Some populations have two (20, arrows), othen have three (2 1, arrows) barbs on the ciliary tufts of the anterior
girdle. In contrast, the tufts of freshwater specimens are bifurcated distally and lack barbs (Fig. 16, 22-26). AG = anterior girdle of ciliary
tufts, MG = middle girdle of ciliary tufts, PR = tentacular processes of oral apparatus, VA = terminal vacuole.
r45

Gymnostomatea
Mesodinium pulex (originals of freshwater popu-
lations from Lake Oglethorpe 122, 24, 261 and
Lake Placid 123, 251, USA, kindly supplied by H.
TAMAR, Indiana State University. In vivo dark
phase contrast micrographs with flash illumina-
tion. Bars 10 pm). 22-26: Lateral views and polar
view (26) of resting specimens, two of which (22,
24) are attached to organic debris by their tentacu-
lar processes. TAMAR (pers. comm.) observed
that freshwater populations differ from marine
ones in that the ciliary tufts are bifurcated termi-
nally (arrows in 22 and 24) and lack barbs (cp.
Figures 11-15, 11-21). AG = anterior girdle of
ciliary tufts, MG - middle girdle of ciliary tufts,
PR = tentacular processes of oral apparatus, VA =
terminal vacuole of unknown function.
146

Gymnostomatea
Genus Askenusia BLocHMANN, 189s
Askenasia comprises three well defined freshwater species (KRAINER & FOISSNER 1990). However, identifi-
cation is difficult, especially in weak populations, because the specimens are fragile, move very rapidly, and
some characters (for example, number of contractile vacuoles) are difficult to recognize. Likewise, organization
and terminology are complicated. Thus, we provide some general illustrations. For separation from -+ Rhabdoas-
kenasia and Mesodinium, see key at introduction to genus Mesodinium.
TF
CO
LF
AG
MG
PG
Gn
o
o
-ö 2
Schematic figures of As/rezcsia illustrating diagnostic features and terminology (from KRAINER & FOISSNER 1990). 1: Lateral view.
Asterisks mark contractile vacuoles with excretory pore. 2: Three somatic ciliary rows showing arrangement of basal bodies (cilia) and fi-
bres usually recognizable in protargol-impregnated specimens. 3: Motion study of the ciliary tufts of the anterior girdle, which forms con-
spicuous flames in resting specimens. 4: Silverline system ofAskenasla sp. after Klein-Foissner silver nitrate impregnation. AG = anterior
girdle of ciliary tufts (synonyms: anterior pectinelles, cirri, pectinelles, pre-equatorial kinety belt), CO = circumoral row of unciliated, paired
granules, §p = posterior granules, LF = longitudinal fibres, MG = middle girdle of ciliary tufts (synonyms: cirri, equatorial kinety belt,
membranelles, pectinelles, posterior pectinelles, sickle-shaped cirri), PG = posterior girdle of bristles (synonym: subequatorial kinety belt),
TF = transverse fibres, VA = crescent-shaped terminal vacuole of unknown function.
t4l

Gymnostomatea
Asken&sia acrostomia TnAINER & FoISSNER, tggo
1990 Askenasia acrostomia KRAINER & FOISSNER, J. Protozool.,37:422.
D i f f e re n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (forterminology, see introduction to genus)
1) Size in vivo 40-50 x 30-50 pm.
2) Body of well-fed specimens broadly pyriform to ovoid, that is, similar as in -+ A. volvox) slender specimens
rhomboidal with tapering anterior portion (Fig.2,l).
3) Macronucleus in mid-body, C-shaped (Fig. 3, 1 , ll); rarely in two sausage-like nodules, as in A. stellaris (-+
similar species).
4) Four contractile vacuoles diametrically in posterior third of cell (Fig. 7, 11).
s) Cytoplasm without symbiotic green algae (possibly, sequestered chloroplasts occur in some populations, Fig.
6). Extrusomes rod-shaped with pointed ends, about 23 pm long (2/3 of cell length; Fi5.4,5, 7, 8).
6) Three distinct ciliary girdles, each consisting of about 70-78 short ciliary rows, in anterior body half (Fig. 1-3,
7 ,9-ll): (i) an anterior girdle of ciliary tufts, which form several forwardly directed flames in immobile speci-
mens; (ii) a very conspicuous middle girdle of sickle-shaped, posteriorly directed ciliary tufts; (iii) a posterior
girdle of long, flexible bristles spread through the middle girdle. Posterior cell portion unciliated, dorsal brush
Iacking (details of ciliature only recognizable after silver impregnation, not necessary for identification).
1) Oral dome occupies anterior end, surrounded by a circular row of unciliated, paired granules recognizable
only after silver impregnation. Oral basket not recognizable either in live or in silver-impregnated specimens
(Fie.2,7,10).
8) Movement highly characteristic: the tufts of the anterior girdle beat in a rotating ring, forming impressively
visible flames during immobile periods (Fig. 7). They propel food toward the cytostome, while the cell ro-
tates slowly. The lightning darts and short, spiralling jumps, which alternate with abrupt stops, are produced
by the bell-shaped skirt of the middle girdle. The bristles of the posterior girdle stabilize the cell during float-
ing (Fig. 1).
Similar species
-+ Askenasia volvox has one contractile vacuole and acicular extrusomes thickened proximally. -+ Askenasia
chlorelligera (1 contractile vacuole, 2 types of pin-shaped extrusomes) is green due to symbiotic algae. -+ Rhab-
doaskenasia minima (1 contractile vacuole) has prominent, club-shaped extrusomes. Askenasia stellaris (LEE-
GARD, 1920) KAHL, l93O (2 contractile vacuoles, 2 sausage-shaped macronuclear nodules) is marine. Inexpe-
rienced workers should not confuse Askenasia acrostomia with + Mesodinium spp. (tiny, less than 30 pm long),
-+ Halteria and other -» oligotrichs (prominent adoral zone of membranelles, no sickle-shaped skirt of ciliary
tufts in mid-body), --> Monodinium and -+ Didinium (conspicuous conical protrusion at anterior trunk end,
length >50 pm) and swarners of + peritrichs (usually cylindroidal, if conical, then broad end directed forward
during swimming). -+ Trichodina species are usually >50 pm, epizoic (sometimes detached from host), and have
a prominent holdfast at the posterior end. l,4 (4 contractile vacuoles), 5 (rod-shaped extrusomes, no symbiotic
green algae), 6 (3 ciliary girdles) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Likely more common than indicated by its late discovery because previously not
distinguished from the more common + A. volvox. The locus classicus of A. acrostomia is near Graz, Austria,
where KRAINER & FOISSNER (1990) discovered it in excavated groundwater ponds. The highest numbers
were found in May 1986 (836 ind. I-'; 8.3 mg m-3), in August 1986 (560 ind. 1-r; 5.6 mg m-3;, and in October 1986
148

Gymnostomatea
(445ind. lt;4.4mgm').During cold, isothermal conditions, numbers did not exceed 200ind. l'. The lowest
numbers (<100 cells 1-1) were found during February and March 1987. In the littoral zone, 380 ind. l-'
(3.8 mg m-3) were observed in May 1987. We fotnd Askenasia acrostomia in a lake in Austria (Wallersee; Fig.
3) and Bavaria (Höglwörther See; Fig. 1, 2, 4-6). The Höglwörther See population contained many brownish in-
clusions highly resembling chloroplasts. Records not substantiated by illustrations: meromictic lake (Höllerersee)
in Upper Austria (NAI-fWERCK 1996); lakes in the Alps and Pyrenees (FELIP et al. 1995); oligotrophic to
mesotrophic lake (Piburger See) in Austria (MACEK et al. 1996).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on algae and ciliates (KRAINER & FOISSNER 1990).
Biomass of 106 specimens about 32 mg (MACEK et al. 1996; our calculations). Mean growth rate in the Piburger
See about 0.12 d-t (MACEK et al. 1996). Throughout the year planktonic in oligotrophic, mesotrophic and
eutrophic lakes. Possibly mixotrophic and more common than indicated by its late discovery.
P.G
l.
w -PG
i,nnc
2
Askenasi.a acrostomia \1,2, 4-6, originals of a population fiom a lake in Bavaria; 3, original of a population fiom a lake in
Austria. 1, 2, in vivo bright field micrographs; 3-6, in vivo interference contrast micrographs). l, 2: Polar and oblique view
showing middle girdle of ciliary tufts and posterior bristle girdle. The sickle-shaped tufts of the middle girdle form a con-
spicuous bright skirt, respectively, a sunflower-like pattern. 3: Squashed specimen showing macronucleus and basal bodies
of ciliary girdles. 4, 5: Rod-shaped extrusomes with pointed ends (important species character! In -+ A. volxox, they are
acicular, respectively, bat-shaped; in -+ A. chlorelligera, they are pin-shaped). 6: Posterior body portion with sequestered
chloroplasts (?). AG = anterior girdle of ciliary tufts, MA = macronucleus, MG = middle girdle of ciliary tufts, OD = oral
dome, PG - posterior girdle of long bristles.
t49

Gymnostomatea
\\,\
\\\
\ \\
\\\
\ \ \\
o
\ \ \\ a
a
PG \\) a t
An-'.
,IJ la\\-,, o
I Ot
o
_§l_ [h
MG
MG
.)a
--':;/
PG
I
9
,t'
a'
ra
t
Askenasinacrostomia (fiom KRAINER & FOISSNER 1990.7,8, in vivo;9-ll, protargol impregnation).7:Lateral view of
a slender specimen (length of cell 40 pm) showing the conically tapered anterior body portion (species name), the three cili-
ary girdles, the rod-shaped extrusomes, and other main organelles. Note the large terminal, acontractile vacuole. Well-fed
specimens have a globular trunk and thus look like + A. volvox. S: Rod-shaped extrusome with pointed ends, about 23 pm
long (cp. Fig. a, 5). The shape of the extrusomes is different from that of --> A. volvox (see Fig. lc, d by that species) and
thus a main species character. 9: Organization of a ciliary row. L0, lL: Oblique anterior and posterior polar view of ciliary
pattern. Note that A. acrostomia has, uniquely, four contractile vacuoles. AG = anterior girdle of ciliary tufts, CO = circular
circumoral row of unciliated granules, CV = contractile vacuoles, E = extrusomes, EP = excretory pore of contractile
vacuoles, MA = macronucleus, MG = middle girdle of ciliary tufts, MI = micronucleus, PG = posterior girdle of long bristles,
pl
= pellicle, VA = crescent-shaped terminal vacuole of unknown function.
150

Gymnostomatea
Askenasia chlorelliger,z KRATNER & ForssNER, 1990
1935 Askenasiavolvox- KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl.,30: 817 (partim, -+ Askenasiavolvox).
1990 Askenasia chlorelligera KRAINER & FOISSNER, J. Protozool.,37:425.
D i f f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (for terminology, see introduction to genus)
1) Size in vivo 30-40 x2545 pm.
2) Body of well-fed specimens pyriform to ovoid, that is, similar as in -+ A. volvox; slender specimens rhomboi-
dal with crown-like protruding extrusome bundles (Fig. 1, 5).
3) Macronucleus in mid-body, ellipsoidal (Fig. 1, 5); rarely in two globular nodules.
4) One contractile vacuole subequatorial (Fig. 1).
s) Cytoplasm with about 20-30 symbiotic green algae making cells grass-green (Fig. 1, 5). Two types of acicu-
lar extrusomes (Fig. 1-3, 6): type 1 about 10 pm long, knobbed proximally, forms elliptical bundles; type 2
about half as long as cell (18 pm), slightly curved.
6) Three distinct ciliary girdles, each consisting of about 54-64 short ciliary rows, in anterior body half (Fig. I, a,
7, 8): (i) an anterior girdle of ciliary tufts, which form several forwardly directed flames in immobile speci-
mens; (ii) a very conspicuous middle girdle of sickle-shaped, posteriorly directed ciliary tufts; (iii) a posterior
girdle of long, flexible bristles spread through the middle girdle. Posterior cell portion unciliated, dorsal brush
lacking (details of ciliature only recognizable after silver impregnation, not necessary for identification).
t) Oral dome occupies anterior end, which is crowned by radially arranged extrusome bundles (Fig. 6) and sur-
rounded by an approximately pentagonal row of unciliated, paired granules recognizable only after silver im-
pregnation. Oral basket not recognizable either in live or in silver-impregnated specimens (Fig. 1, 7).
8) Movement highly characteristic: the tufts of the anterior girdle beat in a rotating ring, forming impressively
visible flames during immobile periods (Fig. 1). They propel food toward the cytostome, while the cell rotates
slowly. The lightning darts and short, spiratling jurnps, which altemate with abrupt stops, are produced by the
bell-shaped skirt of the middle girdle. The bristles of the posterior girdle stabilize the cell during floating.
Similar species
-+ Askenasia volvox (C-shaped macronucleus), -+ Askenasia acrostomia (C-shaped macronucleus, 4 contractile
vacuoles), Askenasia stellaris (LEEGARD, 1920) KAHL, l93O (2 contractile vacuoles, 2 sausage-shaped macro-
nuclear nodules, marine), and -+ Rhabdoaskenasia minima (distinct oral basket with club-shaped extrusomes)
lack symbiotic green algae. Inexperienced workers should not confuse Askenasia spp. with --> Mesodinium spp.
(tiny, less than 30 pm long), -+ Halteria and other -+ oligotrichs (prominent adoral zone of membranelles, no
sickle-shaped skirt of ciliary tufts in mid-body), -+ Monodinium and -+ Didinium (conspicuous conical protru-
sion at anterior trunk end, >50 pm) and swarmers of -+ peritrichs (usually cylindroidal, if conical, then broad end
directed forward during swimming). -+ Trichodina species are usually >50 trrm, epizoic (sometimes detached
from host), and have a prominent, complicated holdfast at the posterior end. 5 (symbiotic green algae present)
and 6 (3 ciliary girdles) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Rare, pelagic in ponds and lakes almost throughout the year, possibly with peaks
in spring and autumn (KRAINER 1988). The locus classicus of Ä. chlorelligera is near Graz, Austria, where
KRAINER & FOISSNER (1990) discovered it in excavated, eutrophic groundwater ponds. It was very abundant
during spring, reaching a peak in May (1904ind.lL; l4.l mBm-3; -+ Ecograms); a smaller peak of 245ind.lr
151

Gymnostomatea
(1.8 mg m-3) occurred in October. Abundances correspond to Oz-values of 10-14 mg l-r and temperatures be-
tween 8o C and22" C. MACEK et al. (1996) fotnd Askenasia chlorelligera in an oligotrophic to mesotrophic
mountain lake (Piburger See) in Austria.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Food not known. The symbiotic green algae indicate, that it can
sustain periods of low food supply by using the algae andlor their metabolites. Biomass of 106 specimens about
I I mg (MACEK et al. 1996) to 20 mg (our calculations). Reliably recorded from Europe only; very likely a rare
species because confusion with apochlorotic Askenasia species is unlikely. The presence of symbiotic green al-
gae indicates that this species can sustain periods oflow food supply.
lnd.l{ mg.m-3
600
400
200
600
400
200
FJctrgrams of Asketrusiu chloralligera (fiom KRAINER 1988). Monthly abundanoes (white bars) and biomasses (black bars; protargol-
impregnated specimens) at 1 m and 3 m in a eutrophic groundwater pond ofAustria.
t52

Gymnostomatea
ü(
!ll
PG
/rh I
,,
AG-\
a
o
MGä
e
Crn
e
6a
ä ;G/t
Gq 3
4
tO
,17i
"\-«ffi
CO
Askenasia chlorelligera (14,7,8, fiom KRAINER & FOISSNER 1990; 5,6, from KRAINER & FOISSNER 1990 redrawn from KAHL
1935. 1, 5, 6, in vivo; 24,7,8, protargol impregnation). 1: Lateral view (length of cell 35 pm) showing the three ciliary girdles, the symbiotic
green algae, the extrusome bundles making the apical cell end crowned, and other main organelles. 2,3: Type 2 (l 8 pm) and type 1 (10 pm)
extrusome. 4: Organization of a ciliary row. 5: Schematic optical section of KAHL's pelagic form of A. volvox. The dark globules are likely
symbiotic green algae, indicating that he observed A. chlorelligera. 6: Polar view showing radially arranged bumps ofextrusome bundles, re-
sembling a cross-section of an apple-core. 7, 8: Anterior and oblique posterior polar view of ciliary pattem. Bar l0 pm. The posterior portion
shows a polygonal, argyrophilic pattem, and at the cell's equator is a circumferential belt of rectangular structures. AG = anterior girdle of cili-
ary tufts, CO = pentagonal circumoral row of unciliated granules, CV = contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes, MA = macronucleus, MG = mid-
pl
dle girdle of ciliary tufts, PG = posterior girdle of long bristles, = pellicle, SA = symbiotic green algae (possibly Siderocelis sp.), VA =
crescent-shaped terminal vacuole of unknown function.
153

Gymnostomatea
Askenasis volvox (ErcHwALD ,18s2) KAHL, 1930
1852 Trichodinavolvox EICHWALD, Bull. Soc. imp6r. nat. Moscou,25:510.
1895 Askenasia elegans BLOCHMANN, Mikroskopische Thierwelt, p. 91 (synonym).
1922 Askenasia elegans BLOCHMANN 1895 - PENARD, Etudes infusoires, p. 61 (detailed redescription from
life).
1930 Askenasia (Halteria) volvox CLAP. u. L., 1858 KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 128 (revision; combining
author; population from 1935 + Askenasia chlorelligera).
l9l3 Askenasia volyox (CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN, 1859) - TAMAR, J. Protozool ., 20: 46 (redescription
from life).
1990 Askenasia volvox (EICHWALD, 1852) KAHL, 1930 - KRAINER & FOISSNER, J. Protozool., 31: 417
(revision of genus; detailed redescription from life and after silver impregnation; -+ taxonomy).
l99l Askenasia volvox (CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN, 1858) - PACKROFF & WILBERT, Arch. Protistenk.,
140l- 126 (redescription from life and after silver impregnation; -+ taxonomy).
1995 Askenasia volvox (EICHWALD, 1852) KAHL, 1930 - FOISSNER, BERGER, BLATTERER & KOH-
MANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll95: 251 ("Ciliate-Atlas",
that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Nomenclature and taxonomv
For nomenclature and synonymy, see KRAINER & FOISSNER (1990) and FOISSNER (1987b). The redescrip-
tions by KRAINER & FOISSNER (1990) and PACKROFF & WILBERT (1991) agree very well, espäcially in
the C-shaped macronucleus (Fig. 1b, g, 8), which was, likely erroneously, described as globular or ellipsoidal in
the older literature (Fig.2a, b). However, at the present state of knowledge, it cannot be excluded that two dis-
tinct species exist, one with a C-shaped macronucleus and another with a globular one. Askenasia elegans senut
FAURE-FREMIET (1924) is very likely a --> Pelagovasicola.
D i f f e re n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (forterminology, see introduction to genus)
1) Size in vivo 30-50 x 20-50 1rm, usually 35-45 pm long.
2) Body broadly pyriform to ovoid (Fig. 2a,b,8,11, 13).
3) Macronucleus in mid-body, C-shaped (Fig. 1b, g, 8; -+ taxonomy).
4) One contractile vacuole subequatorial (Fig. Ib,2a,8,11).
s) Cytoplasm without symbiotic green algae. Extrusomes acicular (barshaped), that is, thickened in proximal
half,10-22 pm (usually 15-20 pm) longr, form conspicuous bundle in anterior body half (Fig. lb-d, 2b, 8).
6) Threedistinctciliarygirdles,eachconsistingofabout4T-61 shortciliaryrows,inanteriorbodyhalf(Fig. la,
e, f ,2a, b, 3, 5-13): (i) an anterior girdle of ciliary tufts, which form 5-12 forwardly directed flames in immo-
bile specimens (Fig. 3); (ii) a very conspicuous middle girdle of sickle-shaped, posteriorly directed ciliary
tufts; (iii) a posterior girdle of long, flexible bristles spread through the middle girdle. Posterior cell portion
unciliated, dorsal brush lacking (details of ciliature only recognizable after silver impregnation, not necessary
for identification).
7) Oral dome occupies anterior end, surrounded by cloverleaf-shaped row of unciliated, paired granules recog-
nizable only after silver impregnation. Oral basket not recognizable either in live or in silver-impregnated
specimens (Fig. 1a, t,5J).
8) Movement highly characteristic: the tufts of the anterior girdle beat in a rotating ring forming 5-12 impres-
sively visible flames during immobile periods (Fig. 3). They propel food toward the cytostome, while the cell
1 In the silver slides of PACKROFF & WILBERT (1991) only 4 pm long, very likely because only partially impregnated (Fig. 5).
154

Gyrnnostomatea
rotates slowly. The lightning darts and short, spiralling jumps, which alternate with abrupt stops, are pro-
duced by the bell-shaped skirt of the middle girdle (Fig. 11, 13). The bristles of the posterior girdle stabrhze
the cell during floating (Fig. la, 10, 13).
Similar species
-+ Askenasia acrostomia has 4 contractile vacuoles and thin, rod-shaped extrusomes. -+ Askenasia chlorelligera
is green due to symbiotic algae, and -+ Rhabdoaskenasia minima has prominent, club-shaped extrusomes . Aske-
nasia stellaris (LEEGARD , l92O) KAHL, 1930 (2 contractile vacuoles, 2 sausage-shaped macronuclear nodules)
is rirarine. Inexperienced workers should not confuse Askenasia yolyox with -+ Mesodinium spp. (tiny, less than
30 pm long), -+ Halteria and other -+ oligotrichs (prominent adoral zone of membranelles, no sickle-shaped
skirt of ciliary tufts in mid-body), -+ Monodinium and -+ Didinium (conspicuous conical protrusion at anterior
trunk end, length >50 pm) and swarmers of -+ peritrichs (usually cylindroidal, if conical, then broad end directed
forward during swimming). -+ Trichodina species are usually >50 pm, epizoic (sometimes detached from host),
(l
and have a prominent holdfast at the posterior end. 1,4 contractile vacuole), 5 (needle-shaped extrusomes, no
symbiotic green algae), 6 (3 ciliary girdles) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Very likely, some of the numerous records refer to the other Askenasia species or to -) Rhabdoaskenasia
minima, which were described only recently by KRAINER & FOISSNER (1990).
Occurrence and distribution: Common but usually rare in the plankton of stagnant and running waters. occa-
sionally benthic, possibly prefers the cold half of the year, that is, water temperatures <15" C. Askenasia volvox
occurs also in ephemeral waters (for example, road puddles, meadow pools) because resting cysts can be formed
(Fig. a); however, true terrestrial biotopes are not colonized (FOISSNER 1998). Locus classicus of Askenasia
volvox is a freshwater biotope near Hapsal, Estonia (EICHWALD 1852). Locus classicus of Mesodinium recur-
vum,a synonym recognized by KAHL (1930), is likely Buffalo, New York, USA, where KELLICOTT (1885)
discovered it in pond water among algae in early spring. Locus classicus of the synonym Askenasia eleg,ans not
known, very likely near Heidelberg, Germany, where BLOCHMANN (1895) lived and worked.
Further records substantiated by illustrations: pre-alpine lakes in Austria (Fig. la-d, g); throughout the year,
peaking during May (170 ind. I r) and October (278 ind.l'), in Styrian groundwater ponds eutrophified by drain-
age from agricultural areas (KRAINER 1988, KRAINER & FOISSNER 1990); extremely productive pond
(Priest Pot) in England (FINLAY et al. 1988; small schematic illustration); sporadically in a mesotrophic and a
eu- to polytrophic lake in western Germany (PACKROFF 1992, PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991); low numbers
in Berlin, Germany, during April (CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN 1859); usually in low numbers in shallow
ponds among macrophytes near Hamburg, Germany (KAHL 1930); clear pond in Barcelona, Spain, during De-
cember and January (BUISÄN 1944); great numbers in various freshwaters of Switzerland, mainly during winter
(PENARD |922,ROUX 1899, l90l); great numbers in Lake Ho Hu, Nanking, China, during November and De-
cember (WANG & NIE 1933); Tibetan Plateau (SHEN 1983); Hulman Lake, a clean, clear lake near Terra
Haute, USA (TAMAR 1973).
Records not substantiated by illustrations: up to 56 ind. l-r in an alpine lake (Piburger See) in Austria mainly from
May to July (ZIMMERMANN 1989); wells near Vienna, Austria (SPANDL 1926a); dominant (43 Vo of total
ciliate number and J2 qo of total ciliate biomass) in a shallow, mesotrophic, alkaline lake (Neusiedler See) during
winter (SCHÖNBERGER 1994, 1994a); floodptain of Danube River in Austria, during March, and in a rain pud-
dle in Moravia in July (SPANDL 1926); ox-bow of Danube River during August and other sites in Czechoslova-
kia (HASSDENTEUFELOVÄ-MORAVCOVÄ 1955, MATIS 1961, 1967); low numbers in an English pond
from January to March (DIXON 1920); small, eutrophic mountain lake in France (SIME NGANDO & GRO-
LIERE 1991, SIME-NGANDO & HARTMANN 1991, SIME-NGANDO et al. 1990); humic Lake Vassiviöre,
French Central Massif, mainly (4241 %) in the 10-15 m zone (CARRIAS et al. 1994); oligo- to mesotrophic
155

Gymnostomatea
Lake Pavin, France (AMBLARD et al. 1993, CARRIAS et al. 1996); Lake Nantua, France (AMBLARD et al.
1994; 60 pm large, identification thus uncertain); Schöhsee, a moderately eutrophic lake in northem Germany
(WICKHAM 1995b); up to 367 ind. l-r (annual mean 56 ind.l-r) in a eutrophic lake (Belauer See) in northern
Germany (ZIMMERMANN 1994); up to 300 ind. I 1 in a eutrophic lake (Plußsee, Germany) from March to early
October (RECK 1987, -+ Table, possibly a misidentified oligotrich according to her Plate 5, Fig. a, b); hypertro-
phic lake (Heiligensee) in Germany during autumn (SKIBBE 1991); up to 3000 ind. l' (October) in a eutrophic
pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Bonn, Germany, throughout the year (WILBERT 1969); bog in Westphalia and
stagnant waters near Bonn and Berlin, Germany (MARSSON 1901, SCHMIDT 1913, 1916); road puddles,
meadow pools, and floodplains in Bavaria, Germany, at pH 5.0-7.5 (DINGFELDER 1962); rare in the benthic
region of the polluted Hamburg Harbour, Germany, from June to October (BARTSCH & HARTWIG 1984);
various freshwater and brackish biotopes in The Netherlands during July (VAN BRUGGEN et al. 1983, VER-
SCHAFFELT 1930); pelagial and benthic region of reservoirs, rearing fishponds and polluted and unpolluted
ponds in Poland (CZAPIK & JORDAN 1976, GRABACKA 1911, 1913, 1977, 1985, KRZYZANEK &
KRZYZANEK 1986); Lake Erken, Sweden, peaking during June and autumn at high concentrations of organic
matters (NAUWERCK 1963); up to 50 ind. l-' in stagnant waters near Basle, Switzerland, during January, April,
and December (RIGGENBACH 1922); in the whole water column of Lake Geneva, Switzerland, from June to
October (ANDRE 1914); highly eutrophic lake (Greifensee) in Switzerland (BÜRGI et al. 1985); stagnant waters
in the Ukraine (DOBROVLIANSKI 1914, OLEKSIV 1985, 1985a, OLEKSIV et al. 1986); in Azerbaijanian res-
ervoirs, performing daily vertical migrations (ALEKPEROY 1984a, 1989, 1990); cooling plant of Moldavian
power station (CHORIK & VIKOL 1973); q to 132 ind. I I in betamesosaprobic and mesotrophic reservoirs, and
in the pelagial and benthic region of lakes in the USSR (ALIEV 1982, BELOV A 1994, KORNIYENKO 1972,
KRAVCHENKO 1969, LUK'JANOVIÖ 1973, MAMAEVA 1976A, MYLNIKOVA I98I, ZHARIKOV & RO-
TAR 1992); occasionally very abundant in Lake Baikal atJ-9" C (GAJEWSKAJA 1933, LOKOT 1987); stag-
nant waters of Tibetan Plateau (WANG 1917);Lake Donghu throughout the year, waters of the Yuelushan area,
and other lakes in China (GONG 1986, HAN & HAO 1995, LI & LIN 1995, NING et al. 1993, SU et al. 1988,
YANG 1989); pond in the botanical garden at the University of Pennsylvania, USA, from June to November
with a peak (4600 ind.lr) in July (WANG 1928); eutrophic, monomictic Lake Oglethorpe, Georgia, USA
(PACE 1982);Brazil (PINTO 1925).
Records from running waters: sparse in flowing waters of Germany, viz., in lowland brooks throughout the year
(HEUSS 1916, -s Table), in the periphyton of an unpolluted foothill stream (PACKROFF & ZWICK 1996), and
in the Rhine River (SCHMITZ 1986); Turiec River and Danube River in Slovakia and Hungary (MATIS & TIR-
JAKOVÄ 1994b,1995, NOSEK & BERECZKY 1981, TIRJAKOVÄ 1993); with low abundance and frequency
in the seston and Sphaerotilus natans community of the Lyna River, Poland (HUL 1986, 1987); Volga River ba-
sin (KOSOVA 1965, MAMAEVA 1919, 1979b); San Joaquin River and Scioto River, USA (ALLEN 1920,
LACKEY 1938b).
Occurs also in brackish waters (VERSCHAFFELT 1930); however, confusion with the marine Askenasia stel-
laris cannot be excluded.
Records of Askenasia sp. from limnetic habitats, possibly referring to A. volvox, which is the most common spe-
cies of the genus: Ltnzer Untersee (oligotrophic), Piburger See (mesotrophic), and other lakes in the easterir Alps
of Austria (RUTTNER 1937, SALBRECHTER & ARNDT 1994, SCHLOTT-IDL 1984,1984a); hypertrophic,
shallow lake and rearing fishponds in Austria (MAYER et al. 1997, SCHLOTT-IDL l99l); oligotrophic Loch
Ness, Lake Windermere, and eutrophic Esthwaite Lake and Priest Pot, England (BERNINGER et al. 1993,
LAYBOURN-PARRY & ROGERSON 1993, LAYBOURN-PARRY et al. 1990, 1994); Lake Constance, Ger-
many, and Schussen River, a tributary to this lake (MÜLLER 1989, MÜLLER et al. 1991, SCHWF,IZEF. 1994,
WEISSE & MÜLLER 1990, WETZEL 1928a); dystrophic lake in Poland (CZAPIK & FYDA 1995); Durat6n
River sediment, Spain (FINLAY et al. 1993); ponds and lakes in the USSR (KORNIYENKO 1970, TROSHINA
1994);Lake Kinneret, a warm meso-eutrophic monomictic lake in Israel (HADAS & BERMAN 1998); fish cul-
ture ponds (TAKAMURA et al. 1995), rivers and other sites in China (TIAN 1995, YOU & XU 1993); rock
pools from Greenland (LARSEN 1992); mountain lake on the Sunda-Islands (RUTTNER 1952); 2 ind.l-1 in
Castle Lake, USA (WIACKOWSKI et al. 1994a); 126 ind.lt in the surface layer of Cayuga Lake during June,
156

Gymnostomatea
and other lakes and ponds in the USA (BEAVER & CRISMAN 1982, CARRICK & FAHNENSTIEL 1990,
DOBBERFUHL et al. 1997, HUNT & CHEIN 1983, LAVRENTYEV et al. 1995, MCGRADY-STEED &
MORIN 1996, MÜLLER-SOLGER er al. 1997, PACE & VAQUE 1994, PACE et al. 1990); abundant through-
out the water column (0-178 m) of Lake Ontario, Canada, mainly during summer (TAYLOR & HEYNEN 1987,
TAYLOR & JOHANNSSON 1991); Bowland Lake, Canada (KELLER et al. 1992); lakes in Chile peaking
(200-600 ind.lr) during winter and late summer (WÖLFL 1996); Lake Fryxell, Antarctica (LAYBOURN-
PARRY etal.1991).
Autecological data: Feeds on algae2-51rm across, diatoms and organic debris (BUISÄN tS++, BÜRGI et al.
1985, FINLAY et al. 1988), according to KRAINER & FOISSNER (1990) also on ciliates (Urotricha, Fig. 8).
Does not ingest fluoresbrite plain microspheres 0.5 pm across (CARRIAS et al. 1996). Biomass of 106 specimens
about 9 mg (AMBLARD et al. 1993; preserved), 18 mg (PACE 1982; preserved), 35 mg (BÜRGI et at. 1985,
preserved; FOISSNER et al. 1995), 110-140 mg (AMBLARD et al. 1994, SIME-NGANDO & HARTMANN
1991; identification uncertain because preserved cells about 65 pm long). Autecological data -+ Table.
Table: Autecological data of Askenasia volvox. Column 1, from BICK & KUNZE (1971; summary of literature data); column 2, from
HEUSS(1976; l3analysesfromlowlandbrooksinGermany);columns3and4,fromRECK(1987;severalanalysesfromaeutrophiclake
[Plußsee] in Germany; column 3, total range; column 4, >200 ind. l-r; probably misidentified).
Parameters References
1 2 .Jt 4
Temperature (" C) ')o 0.8-21.0 3.9-2t.0 1.9-16.9
,L- -/
pH 5.0-7 .5 t .5-8.3 t .3-9.5 7 .9-9.3
i
o, (mg 1') 6.4-t5.2 5.1-15.9 6.t-15.9
Oz (saturation 7o) 26-t68 48-t44 48-r63
BoDs (mg l') 3.1-n .6
l')
HzS (mg 0-0.9
COzr... (mg I ') 6-7 0-26.4
PO+3--P (mg 1') 0.26-1.90
NH+*-N (mg 1') 0.321.40 0.02-0. 15 0.05-0.07
Cl (mg lr) 3t -59
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Europe, Asia and North America; likely cosmopolitan. Common
in the plankton of stagnant and large running waters, but also benthic, possibly preferring temperatures <15" C.
Likely oligo-euryhaline. Mainly algivorous, thus more common in meso-, eu- and hypertrophic than in oligo-
trophic waters, which is also reflected by the betamesosaprobic classification (o = 1, b = 6, a = 3, I = 3,SI=2.2)
proposed by pollution ecologists (FOISSNER et al. 1995). Resting cyst formation known (Fig. a).
r51



Gymnostomatea
_AG
MG
--O_.__;_
H---1-
AG-- :-O-3,&-- =---1a- :_=
\{-O--f _..._1_
-
:-t=::i==:=
N
-MG
l-
lvl :'. 'a9
pe
Askenasia volvox (2a,4, from PENARD 1922;2b, 3, fiom KAHL 1930; 5, fiom PACKROFF & WILBERT l99l; 6-9, from KRAINER &
FOISSNER 1990. 14,8, in vivo; 5-7,9, protargol impregnation). 2a,b,8: Lateral views, 40-50 pm long. 3: Anterior polar view. 4: Resting
cyst. 5-7: Lateral and oblique anterior polar views of ciliary pattem. Extrusomes incompletely stained in specimens shown in Figure 5. 9: Or-
ganization of ciliary rows. AG = anterior girdle of ciliary tufts, CO = circumoral row of unciliated, cloverleaf-like arranged granules, CV =
contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes, F = transverse fibres, MA = macronucleus, MG = middle girdle of ciliary tufts, MI = micronucleus, PG =
posterior girdle of long bristles, X = oral baskets of ingested ciliates (Urotricha sp.).
159

Gymnostomatea
Askenasia volvttx lftom TAMAR 1913, 1979. ln vivo dark phase contrast micrographs with tlash illumination). 10, 12: Polar views. The
globular trunk and the ciliary tufts of the middle girdle form a sunflower-like pattem. 11, 13: Lateral views showing the conspicuous, sickle-
shaped ciliary tufts of the middle girdle from which the long bristles of the posterior girdle protrude. The ciliary girdles cause a particular
movement described in detail by TAMAR (1979). I4z Late divider. 15: Conjugation. AG = anterior girdle of ciliary tufts, CV = contractile
vacuole, MG = middle girdle of ciliary rufrs, PG = posterior girdle of long bristles.
160

Gymnostomatea
Rhabdoaskenasia minimaKRAINER & FoISSNER, tsgl
1990 Rhabdoaskenasia minima KRAINER & FOISSNER, J. Protozool,37: 426.
Taxonomy
The general plan of Rhabdoaskenasia is very similar to that of --s Askenasla. However, the distinct oral basket
(rhabdos; Fig.2,3) and the single filed ciliary rows (Fig. 4; double rows in --> Askenasia) of the middle girdle in-
dicate that the similarity might result from convergent evolution. The rhabdos of Rhabdoaskenasia is highly
similar to that of many -+ prostomatids and gymnostomatids. However, Rhabdoaskenasia lacks, like -s Askena-
sic, a dorsal brush, which is a main character of the -+ prostomatids and haptorid gymnostomatids. At present,
the general organization of R. minima is too close to that of -+ Askenasia to justify separation from the Mesodi-
niidae without elecffon microscopic evidence (KRAINER & FOISSNER 1990).
D i f f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (for terminology, see introduction to genus --> Askenasia)
1) Size in vivo 20-35 x 18-30 pm.
2) Body pyriform to ovoid, that is, similar as in --> Askenasia volvox; cortex rigid, resulting in fairly constant
cell shape, withstanding extended coverslip pressure (Fig. 1).
3) Macronucleus in rear end, reniform (Fig. 1, 5).
r
4) One contractile vacuole in middle trunk region (Fig. 1, 5).
s) Cytoplasm without symbiotic green algae. Two types of club-shaped exffusomes (Fig. 1, 2): type 1 arrayed
around oral basket, 8-9 pm long, comprising club-shaped posterior part about 5 x 1 pm in size and needle-
like, distally curved anterior part about 3.5 pm in length; type 2 scattered in rear end, 7-8 pm long, compris-
ing slender bat-shaped posterior part about 5 x 0.5 pm in size and curved, needle-like anterior part about
3 pm in length.
6) Three distinct ciliary girdles, each consisting of about 57-66 short ciliary rows, in anterior body half (Fig. 1,
3-5): (i) an anterior girdle of ciliary tufts, which form several forwardly directed flames in immobile speci-
mens; (ii) a very conspicuous middle girdle of sickle-shaped, posteriorly directed ciliary tufts; (iii) a posterior
girdle of long, flexible bristles spread through the ryiddle girdle. Posterior cell portion unciliated, dorsal brush
lacking (details ofciliature only recognizable after silver impregnation, not necessary for identification).
7) Oral dome occupies anterior end, surrounded by circular row of paired basal bodies giving rise to oral rods,
which form a distinct basket (rhabdos; clearly recognizable after silver impregnation,Fig.2,3).
8) Movement highly characteristic and as in Askenasia: the tufts of the anterior girdle beat in a. rotating ring,
forming several impressively visible flames during immobile periods (Fig. 1). They propel food toward the
cytostome, while the cell rotates slowly. The lightning darts and short, spiralling jumps, which alternate with
abrupt stops, are produced by the bell-shaped skirt of the middle girdle. The bristles of the posterior girdle
stabilize the cell during floating.
Similar species
Easily confused with Askenasia spp. and Mesodinium spp.! Look for the highly characteristic extrusomes! -+
Askenasia volvox (30-50 pm long), -+ Askenasia acrostomia (4 contractile vacuoles), Askenasia stellaris (LEE-
GARD, 1920) KAHL, 1930 (marine,2 contractile vacuoles, 2 reniform macronuclear nodules), and -+ Askenasia
chlorelligera (with symbiotic green algae) lack a distinct oral basket and club-shaped extrusomes. -+ Mesodin-
ium spp., which are similar in size and shape, lack extrusomes and have the ciliary tufts of the middle girdle at-
tached to the trunk; furthermore, they have thin, tentacular processes at the anterior end. Separation from other
161

Gymnostomatea
similar taxa (for example, oligotrichs), see same section under -+ Askenasia chlorelligera. 4 (1 contractile vacu-
ole), 5 (club-shaped extrusomes, symbiotic green algae lacking), 6 (3 ciliary girdles), 7 (distinct oral basket when
protargol-impregnated) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Rare, but possibly more common than indicated by its late discovery and the
sparse literature probably because sometimes confused with -+ Askenasia spp. or -+ Mesodinium spp.Planktonic
in ponds and lakes. The locus classicus is near Graz, Austria, where KRAINER & FOISSNER (1990) discov-
ered Rhabdoaskenasia minima in excavated, eutrophic groundwater ponds (-+ Ecograms). It was rather abundant
throughout the year ( 100-250 ind. I r), peaking in October with 2610 ind. I I (9.3 mg m t) at a depth of lm and
1120 ind.lr (6 mg m-r) at a depth of 3 m. Lowest numbers were observed in December and January. MACEK et
al. (1996) fornd Rhabdoaskenasia minima in an oligotrophic to mesotrophic alpine lake (Piburger See) in Aus-
tria. MARTIN & MONTAGNES (1993) recorded this or a closely related species (rhabdos not as distinct as in
the type population) from a Canadian fjord.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Food not known. Biomass of 106 specimens about 5 mg (MA-
CEK et al. 1996) to 10 mg (our calculations). Mean growth rate in the Piburger See about 0.22 dt (MACEK et
al. 1996). Reliably recorded from Austria only. Pelagic in stagnant waters.
lnd.l-t I
800 oD
r\
(o
N
400
200
600
400
200
1986
1987
Ecograms of Rhahdoaskenosia ntininru (from KRAINER 1988). Monthly abundances (white bars) and biomasses (black bars; protargol-
impregnated specimens) at I m and 3 m in a eutrophic groundwater pond of Austria.
t62

Gymnostomatea
,i/M,, BA
t/
CO
\ ,mr,
\
,/
tu ./'
\) ,\
P
§
MI
AG
,t
..'ü/
/O"'
ii_0,
4
Rhabdoaskenasin minima (from KRAINER & FOISSNER 1990. l, in vivo; 2-5, protargol impregnation). 1: Lateral view
(length of cell 28 pm) showing the 3 distinct ciliary girdles, the two types of extrusomes in the oral basket region and the
rear end, and other main organelles. 2: Oral basket (rhabdos) "armed" with extrusomes, slightly schematized. The distinct
oral basket and the conspicuous, club-shaped extrusomes are main differences to -+ Askenasia spp. and --> Mesodinium spp.
3: Oblique anterior polar view of ciliary pattern and oral basket. 4: Organization of a ciliary row. 5: Oblique posterior polar
view showing ciliary pattern, macronucleus, and excretory pore of contractile vacuole. AG = anterior girdle of ciliary tufts,
BA = bacteria on surface of anterior body portion (rostrum), CO = circular circumoral row of unciliated basal body pairs giv-
ing rise to nematodesmata (oral basket rods), CV = contractile vacuole, E = club-shaped extrusomes, EP = excretory pore of
contractile vacuole, F = transverse fibres, LI = lithosome-like inclusions, MA = macronucleus, MG = middle girdle of ciliary
tufts, MI = micronucleus, N = nematodesmata (oral basket rods; rhabdos), PG = posterior girdle of long bristles.
r63

Gymnostomatea
Lilämorpha viridis cAJEVSKA l A, te28
1928 Liliimorpha viridis GAJEVSKAJA, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 20: 476.
1930 Liliomorpha viridis GAJEVSKAJA, 1928 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 177 (first reviser; incorrect subse-
quent spelling of Liliimorpha).
1933 Liliimorpha viridis GAJEWSKAJA - GAJEWSKAJA, Zoologica, Stuttg., 32: ll2 (ecology and detailed
description from life).
1995 Liliimorpha viridis GAJEWSKAJA, 1928 - OBOLKINA, Pelagic Animals of Baikal, p. 215 (redescription
after silver impregnation).
Taxonomy
GAJEWSKAJA (1933) classified Liliimorpha and the family Liliimorphidae with the oligotrichs, however, with-
out giving any reason. CORLISS (1961) transferred it to the Didiniidae, without any reason, too. The redescrip-
tion by OBOLKINA (1995, and unpublished English manuscript) shows that the ciliary pattern of this curious,
rare species is rather similar to that of -s Askenasia, indicating that Liliimorpha belongs to the Mesodiniidae.
This group now includes -+ Mesodinium, Myrionecta, -s Askenasia, --> Rhabdoaskenasia, and Liliimorpha. A
key to these genera is contained in the introduction to the genus -+ Mesodinium.
OBOLKINA (1995) found two forms of L. viridis, which differ in size (diameter of preserved specimens
6G-80 pm versus 90-100 pm), number of basal body groups (triples) forming the circumoral row (95-100 versus
270), number of radial stripes extending from the oral opening to the circumoral row (6 versus l9), and number
of rows ("membranelles"; 96-100 versus 190) forming the ciliary girdle at the margin of the funnel. The taxo-
nomic status of these forms is unclear. Further investigations are required. Indeed, we are not entirely convinced
that the species redescribed by OBOLKINA (1995) is a Liliimorpha becattse the shape looks like that of a ordi-
nary + Askenasia (Fig. 6).
Differential diagnosis
1) Diameter in vivo about 110-115 pm, Iength about 40 pm.
2) Body broadly funnel-shaped with overhanging margin. posterior end narrowly rounded (Fig. 1); up to 50 Vo
contractile. Very fragile and fast and thus difficult to.study in life.
3) Macronucleus eccentric in anterior body portion, biscuit-shaped or ellipsoidal (Fig. 2). One micronucleus at-
tached to macronucleus.
4) Two contractile vacuoles opposed in marginal area of funnel (Fig. 2).
5) Cells green due to many, large symbiotic algae (Fig. 1, 2). No extrusomes described.
6) One distinct ciliary girdle at margin of funnel, consists of about 100 (small form, Fig. 5; -+ taxonomy) to 190
(large form, Fig. 3) short rows. Posterior body half sparsely covered by short cilia. Dorsal brush lacking (Fig.
tJ).
7) Oral opening small, in slightly depressed and eccentric centre of funnel, surrounded by about 6 (small form,
Fig.5;-+ taxonomy) to 19 (large form, Fig.3) radial stripes which terminate ata flower-shaped circumoral
ciliary row (Fig. 6; details of oral ciliature only recognizable after silver impregnation, not necessary for iden-
tification).
8) Swims very fast rotating like a wheel.
t64

Gymnostomatea
Similar species
Monotypic, that is, sole species of genus. Unmistakable because of the broad. funnel-shaped habitus and the
symbiotic green algae. After silver impregnation easily recognizable (but see taxonomy) by the flower-like oral
apparatus, the narrow ciliary girdle and the scattered basal bodies in the posterior body half. 2 and 5 are key
characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Very rare. Eeplanktonic in lakes. Locus classicus of Liliimorpha viridis is Lake
Baikal, Russia, where it occurred in "very considerable" numbers in the winter and spring plankton (GAJEWS-
KAJA 1933, OBOLKINA 1995). OBOLKINA (1995) found it mainly during Melosira blooms.
Liliimorpha viridis has been recorded (with two rather convincing micrographs) only once outside of Lake Bai-
kal, namely in a eutrophic lake (Plußsee) of northern Germany (RECK 1987); it peaked in late May (54 ind. 11 in
J m at 5.9o C; --> autecological data) and occurred with low abundances (<10 ind. l-r) also in July (4 m) and Oc-
tober (3 m).
Autecological data: Liliimorpha vlrldis possibly mainly feeds on its symbiotic algae and their metabolites be-
cause food uptake and distinct food vacuoles were never observed (GAJEWSKAJA 1933). Brownish, compact
inclusions resembled the chrysomonade Epichrysis melosirae, which was present in the lake plankton (GA-
JEWSKAJA 1933). According to OBOLKINA (1995), Liliimorpha feeds on the dinoflagellates Gymnodinium
baicalense and, more rarely, Peridinium baicalense. Biomass of 106 specimens about 40 mg (our calculations).
GAJEWSKAJA (1933) fovnd Liliimorpha viridis at04" C,ll-14 mg l-r Oz and pH 1.2J.6. RECK (1987) pro-
vided the following autecological data: 4.8-18.2o C (maximum abundance at 5.9o C), pH 7.4-9.2 (pH 7.5), 1.8 to
14.5 mg lt Oz(3.4 mg f'), 18-109 7o Ozsaturation(27 7o),0.03-0.4 mg IrNH+*-N (0.09 mg l').
GAJEWSKAJA (1933) observed that the symbiotic green algae of L. viridis are bright green even in specimens
collected from the two month ice-covered lake. Furthermore, the symbionts were bright green in spring speci-
mens from a depth of 100-130 m.
Ecological summary: As yet known only from Lake Baikal and the Plußsee in northem Germany; possibly
more common because difficult to preserve and thus likely lost in samples studied with conventional methods.
Furthermore, Liliimorpha viridis is likely cold-stenothermic and thus difficult to maintain in unfixed samples.
Euplanktonic and mixotrophic. The presence of symbiotic green algae indicate that it can sustain periods of low
food supply.
165

Gymnostomatea
tr;§t
1"
\tl t ' .; / - 7 2 7 ,/. :. '. l' ' ..
''-t.-.' r$ -i .' '- -t!;. \. ',a .. , r' '. '. J .'t l ;".t r - .1 "1 ,. '' '. 1/ <' -- :i'.r.''
-rr-.a:r. '-"..'!.. '- 'z.
ru
o o
'oo
CV
gro
MA
..o
q.
SR
I
.! !r lljrr'arrorla,. MG
e ata arrllltllt
"l!
,llrllritL.
,igf
itI,\
i:ii :ril & i p. ,I f. Iit ;3
i'tai! t ri .,': r
,! ;,
j ;i'
i.;G-t:'l !' Ii:
7
Lilämorpha viridis (1, from OBOLKINA 1995, redrawn fiom GAJEWSKAJA 1933;2-7,from OBOLKINA 1995 and an unpublished
manuscript of this author. I , in vivo; 2, in vivo?; 3-5, 7, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation; 6, diagram). 1, 2: Oblique anterior polar
views, I l0-1 l5 pm across. Figure 2 is, according to the manuscript mentioned, from specimens preserved with osmium acid vapours, not
"from life" as stated in OBOLKINA (1995). 3: Anterior polar view of ciliary pattem of large form. 4, 5: Lateral and oblique anterior polar
view of ciliary pattern of small form. 6: Diagram showing main features. Body shape is highly different to that of the original illustration
(Fig. l; -+ taxonomy).7: Detail of ciliary girdle. CO = flower-shaped circumoral ciliary row, CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macro-
nucleus, 146=girdleofciliarytuftsonmarginoffunnel,OO=oralopening,SA=symbioticgreenalgae,SR=stripes.
166

Gymnostomatea
Didinium chlorelligerum KAHL, ts3s
1935 Didinium chlorelligerumI{AHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 815.
Nomenclature and taxonomy
Didinium chlorolligerum in NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK (1991, p. 25) is an incorrect subsequent spelling.
We reinvestigated this species and confirmed that it is different from the well-known + D. nasutum. Like -+
Monodinium chlorelligerum, it is a good example that chlorotic (with symbiotic algae) and apochlorotic popula-
tions ofthe "same" species are often different taxa. Didinium chlorelligerumis different from -s D. nasutumnot
only by the zoochlorellae but also by the special set and arrangement of the extrusomes (Fig. 6-10).
Di llerential diagnosis
l) Size in vivo about 80-110 x 40-80 pm.
2) Body globular to cup-shaped with widely rounded posterior end and 15-35 pm long, conical protrusion (pro-
boscis, oral dome) in centre of anterior trunk end (Fig. 1-5, 11,12, 16,I7).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, semicircular (Fig. 3, 15).
1) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end (Fig. | , 3 , 2l).
s) Cells green due to numerous symbiotic algae 4-6 pm across (Fig. l, 3,4, ll-13, 15). Four typbs of extru-
somes in proboscis and trunk (Fig. 3, 6-10, 13, 15,19,20,22,23): type I rod-shaped, 12pm long, found
only in cortex, which is thus densely granulated; type 2 rod-shaped, slightly curved, 5-6 pm long, in probos-
cis and trunk; type 3 thorn-shaped, distinctly curved, about 10 pm long, mainly around base of proboscis;
type 4 needle-shaped, 20-25 pm long, attached to top of proboscis.
6) About 50 basal body rows, which are ciliated only at the anterior end and slightly subequatorially, forming
two conspicuous girdles (wreaths of pectinelles; Fig. 1, 3,5, ll, 13, 16, 19). Undemeath each ciliary wreath 5
rows of minute, paired cilia (dorsal brushes; clearly recognizable only in silver slides and the scanning elec-
tron microscope, not necessary for identification; Fig. 16).
7) Oral dome (proboscis) in centre of anterior trunk end, projects conspicuously from body proper, 15-35 pm
long, narrowly conical, base 10-15 7o of body widlh (Fig. 14,6,11-13, l6-18).
8)
Swims very fast in wide spirals rotating about main body axis.
Similar species
Didinium chlorelligerum is easy to separate from -+ Didinium nasutum, which is larger (80-200 x 60-140 pm,
usually 12(l--150 pm long) and, more importantly, lacks symbiotic green algae. The peculiar set of extrusomes
occurs also in -+ Monodinium perrieri, which, however, lacks symbiotic algae, has only an anterior ciliary
girdle, and is slightly smaller (<80 pm vs. >80 pm). --) Monodinium chlorelligerum, which also has symbiotic
green algae, is usually smaller (38-60 x3044 pm vs. 80-1 10 x 40-80 pm) and has only an anterior ciliary gir-
dle. Unfortunately, middle dividers of --> M. chlorelligerumlook very much like Didinium chlorelligerumbe-
cause they also have two ciliary girdles and a similar size; however, middle and late dividers of Monodinium
chlorelligerum have a contractile vacuole with excretory pores above the posterior ciliary girdle and a more or
less distinct division furrow. 2 (proboscis), 5 (symbiotic green algae, type 3 extrusomes around base of
proboscis), 6 (two ciliary girdles) are key characters for identification.
t6l

Gymnostomatea
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic. Locus classicus is a bog pond. very likely near Hamburg, Ger-
many, where KAHL lived and worked. We found Didinium chlorelligerum rn the eutrophic pond at Salzburg
University, Austria, in late May (Fig. 3-23). Only two further records available, namely, from reservoirs of the
Seversky Donets Basin in the USSR (KRAVCHENKO 1969) and from an unknown locality of the USSR (NES-
TERENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Food not known, possibly as in -+ D. nasutum. Biomass of 106
medium-sized specimens about 170 mg according to our calculations, 400 mg according to NESTERENKO &
KOVALCHUK (1991). Reliably recorded from Europe only. Euplanktonic. Probably a rare species because con-
fusion with other didinids unlikely due to the easy-to-recognize specific characters (green colour, two ciliary gir-
dles).
PR-
CV
-Gl
SA
MA_ -
2
-FV
-G I
Didinium chlorelligerum ( l, 2, tiom KAHL 1935; 3-10, originals of a population fiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg Uni-
versity, Austria. 1-10, in vivo). 1, 2: Type population, 80 pm. 3: Representative specimen from the Salzburg population,
length with proboscis 110 pm. Arrows mark thom-shaped extrusomes around base of proboscis (Fig. 6,9).41 5: Shape vari-
ants. Didinium chlorelligerum contains many symbiotic green algae,44 pm across, shown in Figure 4. 6-10: Proboscis re-
gion showing arrangement and types of extrusomes. Type 1 (7): rod-shaped, 1-2pm 1ong, found only in cortex; type 2 (8):
rod-shaped and slightly curved, 5-6 pm long, in proboscis and trunk; type 3 (9): thorn-shaped and distinctly curved, about
10 pm long, found mainly around base of proboscis; type 4 (10): acicular, 20-25 pm long, attached to top of proboscis. CV
= contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuole with brown content, GI = anterior and slightly subequatorial ciliary girdle, MA =
macronucleus, pB = proboscis (oral dome), SA = symbiotic green algae.
168

Gymnostomatea
G,[
,t.
ffil
ffiV
Didiniumchlorelligerum (ll-lT,originalsof apopulationfromtheeutrophicpor.rdatSalzburgUniversity,Austlia. ll-l3,invivobright
field micrographs; 14, protargol impregnation; 15, in vivo interference contrast micrograph; 16, 17, scanning electron micrographs). 11-13'
16,17zLaterul, dorsal and ventral views showing long and narrow proboscis, anterior and subequatorial ciliary girdle, and symbiotic green
algae making cells green (dark in micrographs) under bright field illumination. Underneath each ciliary girdle are 5 rows of minute, paired
cilia, forming the dorsal brush (arrows). 14: Oral basket rods at top ofproboscis. 1.5: Squeezed cell showing symbiotic green algae, semicir-
cular macronucleus, and part of a ciliary girdle composed of narrowly spaced, short ciliary rows (arrows). CV = contractile vacuole, E = ex-
trusomes (types and arrangement, see Figures 6-10), GI = anterior and subequatorial ciliary girdle, MA = macronucleus, pp = proboscis
(oral dome), SA = symbiotic green algae.
t69

Gymnostomatea
t
ä
t
tG]
'-Gl
1S
Didinium chlorelligerum (18-23, originals of a population fiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria. 18, 2l-23, scanning
electron micrographs; 19, protargol impregnation; 20, in vivo interference contrast micrograph). 18: The proboscis is usually long and nar-
row. Some cilia ofthe anterior girdle were detached by the preparation procedures. 19: Ciliary girdles and heavily impregnated extrusomes.
20: Squeezed proboscis region showing extrusomes and symbiotic green algae. 21: Posterior pole region with excretory pores ofthe contrac-
tile vacuole. 22,23:Top ofproboscis with emerging extrusomes. E = exkusomes, EP = excretory pores ofcontractile vacuole, GI = anterior
and subequatorial ciliary girdle, SA = symbiotic green algae, i 4 = extrusome types (cp. Figures 7-10).
t70

Gymnostomatea
Didinium nasutum (uür-lpR, 1773) srEIN, 1859
l'7'73 Vorticella nasuta UÜt-t-BR, Vermium Terrestrium et Fluviatilium, p. 102 (without illustration).
1786 Vorticella nasuta MÜLLER, 1173 - MÜLLER, Animalcula Infusoria, p. 268 (illustration).
1859 Didinium nasutum (O. F. MÜLLER) - STEIN, Lotos, 9: 5 (combining author).
1893 Didinium nasutum (STEIN) - BALBIANI, Archs zool. exp. 96n.,2:363 (morphology and biology).
1930 Didinium nasutum O. F. MÜLLER, 1786 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., l8: 125 (revision).
1968 Didinium nasutum - WESSENBERG & ANTIPA, Protistologica,4: 427 (detailed redescription after sil-
ver impregnation and electron microscopy).
1910 Didinium n(tsutum - WESSENBERG & ANTIPA, J. Protozool., 17: 250 (electron microscopical study on
prey capture and ingestion).
1984 Didinium nasutum (O. F. MÜLLER, 1786) - FOISSNER, Stapfia, 12:44 (redescription from life and after
silver impregnation).
1986 Didinium nasutum O. F. MÜLLER, 1786 - DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS, Faune tropicale,26:
172 (short taxonomic monograph).
1995 Didinium nasutum (MUELLER, 1773) STEIN, 1859 - FOISSNER, BERGER, BLATTERER & KOH-
MANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll95: 228 ("Ciliate-Atlas",
that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Diilerenlial diagnosis
1) SizeinvivoS0-200x60-140pm,usually lz}-ls}prmlong,accordingtoBÜRGER(1905)up,to320pm
long.
2) Body slenderly to broadly cup-shaped with widely rounded posterior end and moderately long, conical pro-
trusion (proboscis, oral dome) in centre of anterior trunk end (Fig. 1, 2, 10, l3).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, semicircular. Several micronuclei (Fig. 1, 7).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end (Fig. l, 1 , 10, 16).
5) Proboscis and trunk with 4 types of extrusomes (Fig. 1. 7, 11): type I (mucocysts) 0.27-0.75 trrm across,
found only in the cortex, which is thus densely granulated; type 2 (pexicysts) rod-shaped, about 7 pm long,
found only in centre ofproboscis; type 3 (toxicysts) rod-shaped,22-26 pm long, found only in periphery of
proboscis; type 4 (cyrtocysts) curved, rod-shaped, about l0 pm long, randomly distributed under body sur-
face.
6) 60-100 basal body rows, which are ciliated only at the anterior end and slightly subequatorially, forming two
conspicuousgirdles(wreathsof pectinelles; Fig. 1,2, 1,8, 10, 13, 15, 16).Underneatheachciliarywreath5
rows of minute, paired cilia (dorsal brushes; clearly recognizable only in silver slides and the scanning elec-
tron microscope, not necessary for identification; Fig. I , 1 , 8, 12, 14) .
1) Oral dome (proboscis) in centre of anterior trunk end, projects distinctly from body proper, conical, base
about 15-25 7o of body width (Fig. 1,2,1, 10, 13, 15).
8) Swims very fast rotating about main body axis, also spinning and jumping.
Similar species
Didinium nasutum is easy to separate from -+ Didinium chlorelligerum, which is smaller (80-110 x 40-80 pm)
and, more importantly, has symbiotic green algae. Note, however, that D. nasutum turns green for some time
when feeding on ciliates having symbiotic green algae, e.g. Paramecium bursaria (REUKAUF 1930). The ma-
rine D. gargantua MEUNIER, l9l0 has the posterior ciliary girdle more subequatorially than D. nasutum and
possesses only three brush rows (PETZ et al. 1995). -+ Monodinium species have only an anterior ciliary girdle.
However, middle and late dividers of Monodiniumhave two ciliary girdles and some are even similar in size to
nt

Gymnostomatea
D. nasutum. Thus, they are easily confused. The best characters for separatingMonodiniure dividers from nor-
mal Didinium specimens are a contractile vacuole and excretory pores near mid-body and, in late dividers, the di-
vision furrow. 1 (usually >100 pm), 2 (proboscis), 5 (no zoochlorellae), 6 (two ciliary girdles) are key characters
for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Throughout the year pelagic and benthic in all types of waters including ephem-
eral habitats, especially when paramecia, the preferred food are abundant (BICK I972a). Numerous records
available because conspicuous, in fact, however, less common than, for instance, many -) oligotrichs and -+
prostomatids; very rare in sewage treatment plants and terrestrial biotopes.
MÜLLER (1113,1186) discovered Didinium nqsutum among Lemna in November, probably somewhere in Den-
mark. Other records substantiated by illustrations: with high abundance in an ephemeral meadow pond with hay
near Salzburg City, Austria, during early July (FOISSNER 1984); Denmark (WESENBERG-LUND 1952); ben-
thic below the outlet of a sewage treatment plant in the Windach, a small, alphamesosaprobic river in Bavaria,
Germany (FOISSNER etaL.1995, Fig. 10, 11, 13-16); France (DRAGESCO 1966a); dirty water in South India
(NAIDU 1965; illustrations of D. nasutum and -+ Monodinium balbianii confused); pond water in India (GU-
LATI 1925); ponds in China (WANG 1925): small stream near Iowa City, USA, and in Lake Okoboji among de-
caying vegetation during August (EDMONDSON 1906); Mexico (SAMANO & SOKOLOFF 1931); Chile
(BÜRGER 1905, IZQUIERDO 1906); Peru (SARMIENTO & GUERRA 1960); Cameroon, Benin, and Chad
(DRAGESCO 1910, r912a, DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS l936).
Records, mainly pelagic, not substantiated by illustrations: mesotrophic and eutrophic lakes (Höllerersee, Mond-
see, Piburger See) in Upper Austria and Tyrol (NAUWERCK 1996, SALBRECHTER & ARNDT 1994,
SCHLOTT-IDL 1984); groundwater ponds in Siyria, Austria (KRAINER 1988); forest ponds in the floodplains
of the Elbe River, Czechoslovakia (PROKESOVA lgSg); mesotrophic and eu- to polytrophic lakes, ponds and
road puddles in Germany, Poland, Switzerland, and Czechoslovakia (CZAPIK & JORDAN 1976, DING-
FELDER 1962, KRAMER 1964, LAUTERBORN 1894, MARSSON 1901, MATIS 1966, MERMOD 1914,
PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991, STEIN 1859a, STEINMANN & SURBECK 1934, WILBERT 1969,
ZACHARIAS 1893, 1894a); up to 100 ind. l-r in a lake (Belauer See) of Germany (ZIMMERMANN 1994); up
to 69 ind. 1-r in a eutrophic lake (Plußsee) of Germany (RECK 1987; -+ Table); extremely polluted harbour basin
in Hamburg, Germany (HECKMAN et al. 1990); pond in a German cave (GRIEPENBURG 1934); cooling sys-
tem of a conventional power station in Germany (BERNERTH 1982); up to 5300 ind. l-r in highly eutrophic res-
ervoirs of Spain (SALVADÖ CABRE 1993, SALVADO & GRACIA 1991); sometimes dominant in reservoirs
and hatchery ponds of Azerbaijan (ALEKPEROV 1980, 1982,1983, 1984a, ALEKPEROV & KRYUCHKOV
I
1982); up to 210 ind. I in the Kremenchug reservoir during spring, and in other Ukrainian reservoirs and ponds
(NEBRAT 1915, 1980, OLEKSIV 1985, 1985a, OLEKSIV et al. 1986); Lake Dzhandar, Lake Onega, oligo-
trophic lake Svetloyar, and lakes in the Gor'kiy region (724 ind.l-r in October), USSR (ALIEV 1988, KUSTOV-
LYANKINA 1990, PETROVA & SMIRNOVA 1914, see biomass data; PETROVA et al. 1976); cooling basin
of a power station, reservoirs and ponds in the USSR (BELOVA 1989, 1994, KORNIYENKO 1910, 1912,
KRAVCHENKO 1969, MIRABDULLAEV 1988, 1989, MYLNIKOVA 1981, 1992b, TIMOFEEVA 1989,
ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992); Lake Baikal and surroundings, especially during winter and spring (GAJEVS-
KAJA 1921, KAPLIN 1969, LOKOT 1987); with low abundance in a rice paddy in Laos (HECKMAN 1974);
Tibetan Plateau (WANG 1917); Lake Donghu, China (GONG 1986, YANG & HUANG 1994); pond and stag-
nant ditch in Japan (MURAMATSU 1957, YAGIU & SHIGENAKA 1965); Lake Cromwell, Canada (PUYTO-
RAC et al. 1972); Reelfoot Lake, Lake Nipigon, Van Cortlandt Lake, Minnesota lakes, Devil's lake complex,
Oklahoma lakes, Brush Lake, and various types (acidic, non-acidic, oligotrophic, mesotrophic, hypertrophic) of
Florida lakes, USA (BEAVER & CRISMAN 1989a, BEVEL 1938, BIGELOW 1923, CALKINS 1915, COLE
1955, EDMONDSON 1920, GABEL 192'7, RIDDLE 1905); up to 25 ind. l-r (September) in the surface layer of
Cayuga Lake, USA (HUNT & CHEIN 1983); at 21.8" C in a spring-fed, artificial, fertilized, nitrogen-rich farm
pond of Virginia, USA (BOVEE 1960); highly abundant in tundra pools (5-6' C, pH 6.3) of Alaska, USA (SUL-
LIVAN 1957); Costa Rica (RUIZ 1961); waters from the River Plate and pleustonic in stagnant waters of Argen-
fl2

Gymnostomatea
tina (CARBONELL 1935, CELA 1972); Brazll, including northern Pantanal (CUNHA 1913, HARDOIM &
HECKMAN 1996).
Many benthic and planktonic records from running waters, for example, Thames River, England (GALAL 1992);
Elbe River and Isebekkanal, a slowly running, hypertrophic water in Hamburg, Germany (CASPERS &
SCHULZ 1960, 1964); ox-bow of Danube River in Austria, Slovakia and Hungary (BERECZKY 1971, 1911a,
1991, MATIS & TIRJAKOYA 1994b, MITIS 1941, NOSEK & BERECZKY 1981); Volga River, Russia (MA-
MAEVA l9'79b); San Joaquin River, Scioto River and Tennessee Rivers, USA (ALLEN 1920, LACKEY 1938b,
1942).Further records from running waters, see FOISSNER et al. (1995).
According to BICK (1967), Didinium nasutumis confined to freshwater, and PATTERSON et al. (1989) also do
not mention it in their review on ciliates from marine sediments. In spite of this, several records are available
from inland salt waters and marine environments, for example, saline lakes in Romania (BUJOR 1902) and the
USSR (AGAMALIEV 1980, BOUTCHINSKY 1895); Darss-Zingst estuary, southern Baltic (ARNDT 1991);
Baltic Sea (MAMAEVA 1988); coastal groundwater of B1ack Sea (CZAPIK 1952); Ob estuary, Karian Sea
(ROSSOLIMO 1927); saline section of Salt Fork River in Illinois, USA (SMALL et al. 1971); Mobile Bay, AIa-
bama, USA (JONES 1974). Possibly, some (all?) of these records refer to the marine D. gargantua MEUNIER,
1910 (-+ similar species section), which has the rear ciliary girdle subterminally, like the D. nasutum depicted by
JONES (t914).
Didinium nasutum rarely occurs in activated sludge plants and trickling filters (CURDS 1975, LACKEY 1938a).
SCHERB (1968) counted up to 100 000 ind. l-r in activated sludge supplied with dairy wastes, and LIEBMANN
(1936) found 20 000 ind. 1-r in the surface layer (Kahmhaut) of an 1l-day-old municipal waste water. BICK &
SCHOLTYSECK (1960) observed D. nasutum in sewage oxidation ponds near Cologne, Germany,, and MA-
DONI & VIAROLI (1985) found it in macrophyte-covered sewage basins of northern Italy.
Reliable recorded from Holarctic and Paleotropic lerrestrial habitats (FOISSNER 1998).
Autecological data: Mainly feeds on large paramecia (P. caudatum, P. multimicronucleatum, P. putrinum, P. te-
traurelia; Fig. 4 6, 9; -+ Ecogram), but also on other ciliates, such as -s Coleps hirtus, Colpidium spp., Col-
poda sp., Dexiostoma campylum, Frontonia sp., -+ Halteria grandinella, Lacrymaria olor, Tetrahymena pyri-
formis, and 30-50 pm sized pieces of Spirostomum ambiguum (BALBIANI 1893, BEFRS 1928a-c,1959, BER-
GER 1979, CALKINS 1915, GAUSE 1934, GRAHAM & CANALE 1982, GRAVE 1982, HARA & ASAI
1980, HEWETT 1987, 1988, HOLYOAK & LAWLER 1996, LUCKINBILL 1973, MALY 1978, MAST 1909,
PARDUCZ 1954, RIGGENBACH 1922, SERAVIN & ORLOVSKAJA 1977, THON 1905, WESSENBERG &
ANTIPA 1970). However, D. nasutum cannot be successfully cultivated with Paramecium bursaria (SCHWAR-
TZ 1965). BERGER (1980) found that predatory efficiency of didinia attacking apochlorotic P. bursaria was
significantly greater (>10 times) than that exhibited for normal cells as measured by the escape frequency of
prey, indicating that zoochlorellae within P. bursaria tend to discourage predation by releasing distasteful me-
tabolites; a recent confirmation of an old result by REUKAUF (1930)! A single prey is often attacked by several
didinids (Fig. 9), which take 2-3 min to completely ingest a Paramecium (VEILLEUX 1979). Details on preda-
tion of ciliates, especially Paramecium, see DRAGESCO (1962), PÄRDUCZ (1954), SCHWARTZ (1965), and
WESSENBERG & ANTIPA ( 1970). Occasionally , D . nasutum feeds on green algae and dinoflagellates (FOISS-
NER 1984, SKIBBE 1991). Didinium nasutum and its main food, Paramecium, have often been used for
predator-prey models (e.g., GAUSE & WITT 1934, HARRISON 1995, LUCKINBILL 1913,1974).
BURBANCK & EISEN (1960) found that D. nasutum grown on monoflorally-fed paramecia or starved parame-
cia maintained a Iow daily division rate (0.88-2.06), and died after 3 or 4 days, frequently showing structural ab-
normalities before death. However, this was not confirmed by BUTZEL & BOLTEN (1968) and BUTZEL &
HORWITZ (1965). According toBUTZEL & BOLTEN (1968), a minimum of 45 well-fed Paramecium aurelia
is required daily for maximum fission rates ale to be maintained. EVANS (1958) and HEWETT (1980a) found
that D . nasutum requires, depending on prey density, 2.0-3.8 specimens of Paramecium multimicronucleatum or
3.5-6.1specimens of P. aurelia for one division. Specific growth rate 0.085-0.98 h I (SALT 1974,1975,TAY-
fl3

Gymnostomatea
LOR & SHUTER 1981). BEERS (1928a, b) observed an average fission rate of 34 per day, corresponding to a
generation time of 4.6-8.0 h (20" C) estimated by PETROVA et al. (1916) and RIEDER (1971).
Biomass of 106 specimens about 600 mg (GRAHAM & CANALE 1982),500 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1995, NES-
TERENKO & KOVALCHUK l99l), 120m9 (SALT 1975), about 48 mg (PETROVA & SMIRNOVA 1974;
misidentification?, miscalculation?). HEWETT (1980b, 1987) found that the size of D. nasutum increases with
increasing prey size across a range of sizes of Paramecium species. Respiration energy losses 31.2 pJ ind.-'hr at
10o C and 55.5 pJ ind.-r h-r at 20" C (200 ng per specimen; LAYBOURN 1977). Oxygen consumption is
27.5x104 plh-rind.-'at20"C,20xl}a plhrind.-rat 15oC, and 15.5 xlOaplhrind.rat 10'C (LAY-
BOURN 1977). The bulk of the nitrogen excreted by D. nasutum is in the form of ammonia (WEATHERBY
I
1929). pH limits 5.0 and 9.6, optimum range 6.4-8.4 (BEERS 1927). Didinium did not survive 600 pg I Cu
(DOUCET & MALY 1990). Swims with up to 3 mm s ' (PÄRDUCZ 1961, SALT 1979).
Didinium nasutum makes resting cysts (BALBIANI 1893, BEERS 1926,1935, RIEDER 1913;Fig.3) and en-
cysts most readily at 25-30" C, but also encysts below 16o C or above 39' C (MAST & IBARA 1923). BEERS
(1937) found that cysts remain viable in hay infusion for at least ten years. Excystment is initiated by bacteria,
but their presence is not required throughout the process. Axenically grown paramecia, shown to be adequate
food forD. nasutum, will not induce excystment (BUTZEL & HORWITZ 1965).
Table: Autecological data of Didinium nasutum. Column 1, from BICK & KUNZE (1971; summary of literature data); column 2, from
BERECZKY (1975; several analyses frorh the mesosaprobic Danube River in Hungary); columns 3, from RECK (1987; several analyses
from a eutrophic lake [Plußsee] in Germany); column 4, from ZIMMERMANN (1989; several analyses from a mesotrophic lake [Piburger
Seel in Austria); column 5, from PATRICK et al. (1967; several analyses from the Savannah River, USA).
Parameters References
.|
1 2 J 1 5
Temperature (" C) 0-25 8-18 t9 4.t-l 6.5 23-28
pH 6.0-8.0 1.1-8.2 8.7-9.3 6.6-7.1
o, (mg l') 0.6- 1 3.5 2.8-16.0 10. I -t6.9 4.2-10.3 >5.0-7.0
Coz rc. (mg l-r) 01.2 0+.t 5-10
NH+*-N (mg l') 0-1.4 0-r.7 0.06-0. 1 0.02-2.2 0.009-0.03 r
NO: -N (mg I') 0.4-2.1 0.01-0.2
NOz -N (mg 1') 0.02-0.05 <0.007
' NH,-N.
Ecological summary: Recorded from all continents, except
for Australia and Antarctica, and a great variety of habitats, §
§
including ephemeral waters and soil because permanent §
t
cysts can be formed (Fig. 3). Planktonic and benthic. Al-
though occurring in all seasons not as common as several lt, P. caudatun
§
other euplanktonic ciliates, for example, -+ oligotrichs and t§
+
prostomatids. Eurythermic and possibly holo-euryhaline. \§ yo 0. na sutun
As a rather speciftc Par"amecium predator, Didinium nasu- .e \-/-r---_{tr
tum very likely indicates highly eutrophic and moderately §
o t 2' tT"gr' J
saprobic conditions , at least when occurring in considerable
numbers. Saprobic classification according to F'OISSNER
Ecogram from Ditlirtiutrt nu.\uttun 1l'r'ont GALJSE 193-ll.
et al. (1995): alphamesosaprobic to betamesosaprobic (b = Abundance of Parameciunt c'audatum and D. nasutunt tn cul-
4, a- 1,p - 2,I - 2,SI = 2.8). tures (abscissa = days; ordinate = individuals per 0.5 ml).
174

..P R
Gl -
/\
\
-D B
FV
GI
CV-
.rif,
'j.]r.I
(#>,,\l?
\r#
.,s.{
--(
_G
.§l .:a :tr
: =t, § l'. !a-I ,I \ a a=:r
=:.
\Ii :a a
:l
-MA it=:t I
ztJ
!aä = _CR
\::l:r_§=
-DB
2 {{ :q at { == :l
.=!
,-G .\= :t
f:r
Y
J
.!,
'I
I
f P -------:
Didiniwnnasutum(l,7,u,fiomFOISSNERl984; 2,fiomKAHL1930; 3,fromBEERS1945l'4-6,9,fiomMASTl909. l6,9,invivo;
7, 8, protargol impregnation). [,2: Dorsal and lateral view, 155 pm, 120 pm. 3: Resting cyst, 160 pm. 4: A large ParanteciLrni immediately
after having been attacked by a small D . nasutunt. The discharge of the trichocysts has mechanically forced the Didiniunt back and produced
a marked protuberance on the surface of the prey. 5,6: A Didiniunz entangled in a mass of trichocysts after the attacked Parameciunt has es-
caped by tearing off the cytoplasmic protuberance (Fig. 4). 7, 8: Ciliary pattem of dorsal side and detail of anterior brush and girdle. Bar =
10pm. 9: A Paranrct'iunt attacked by four didinia with widely opened proboscis. CR = unciliated basal body rows, CV = contractile
vacuole, DB = dorsal brush, E = extrusomes, EP = excretory pores of contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuole, GI = anterior and posterior
ciliary girdle, MA = macronucleus, N = oral basket rods (nematodesmata), PR = proboscis (oral dome).
n5

Gymnostonratear
*ia .-. ,:i #. . : - ) ,- l 1i. . ,r , f- ' :l:i; 'aw -i: .' ! - f/. } j i: :: f:*: W . u,*1, * :_L ' ,:t- : il. .l ;. l::' .' :u9 :.l-.: gt"t ': .), i,*I t:'
P
contrast micrograph1' 12, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation; I 3, [ 4, scanning electron micrographs). 10, 13: Lateral views. The cilia-
ture of Didiniunr is reduced to an anterior and a subequatorial ciliary girdle, each composed of 60-100 oblique rows (pectinelles); under-
neath each girdle are five short rows ofminute, paired cilia, the dorsal brushes. All other basal bodies ofthe longitudinally arranged rows are
unciliated (Fig. 1,7). 11: Extrusomes (arrows). 12: The finely meshed silverline system becomes widely meshed in the dorsal brush region.
14: Each dorsal brush of D. nasutum is composed of 5 rows (arrows) of minute, paired, clavate cilia. CV = contractile vacuole, DB = dorsal
brush, EP = excretory pores of contractile vacuole, GI = anterior and posterior ciliary girdle, pB = proboscis (oral dome).
n6



Gymnostomatea
Monodinium alveolatum 6AHL, 1930) nov. comb.
1930 Didinium alveolatum KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 126.
1954 Didinium alveolatum KAHL - CANELLA, Pubbl. civ. Mus. Stor. nat. Ferrara, 4: 108 (record substanti-
ated by micrograph).
1986 Didinium alveolatum KAHL l93Z - CHARDEZ, Revue vervi6t. Hist. nat. , 43: 20 (illustrated record).
Taxonomy
Didinium alveolatum has a single citiary girdle (Fig. 1), and thus we transfer itto Monodinium. Monodinium al-
veolatum is an extraordinary species, which has been rarely recorded since the original description in 1930. We
rediscovered it only by chance because its overall appearance is very similar to -> M. balbianii balbianii.The
curious cortex structure is, to our best knowledge, unique (Fig. 16-21). Like + M. perrieri, which we rediscov-
ered, M. alveolatum is an impressive example for our ignorance of plankton ciliate diversity and of diversity of
didinids in particular.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 50-65 x 35-55 pm.
2) Body broadly cup-shaped with widely rounded posterior end and moderately long, conical protrusion (pro-
boscis, oral dome) in centre of anterior trunk end (Fig. 1 , 3, 4, 9, 73, 14).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, dumb-bell shaped (Fig. 1,3,12).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end, slightly eccentric (Fig . l, 3, 14).
5) Proboscis and cytoplasm with many extrusomes (Fig. 3,7, 8, 10, 11): type 1 elongate clavate, asymmetrical,
about 7 x 0.5 pm; type 2 rod-shaped and about 5 pm long. Cortex with an about 1.5 pm thick alveolar layer,
which is clearly recognizable only under high magnification; alveoli polygonal, each with single, ellipsoidal,
about 1 trrm long, compact inclusion performing Brownian movement (Fig. 1-3, 5,6, 16-21).
6) About 40-60 basal body rows, which are ciliated only at the anterior end, forming a conspicuous girdle
(wreath of pectinelles; Fig. 1,3,4,9, 13-15). Undemeath ciliary wreath 5-7 rows of minute, paired cilia
(dorsal brush; clearly recognizable only in silver slides and the scanning electron microscope; Fig. 1, 13).
1) Oral dome (proboscis) in centre of anterior trunk end, projects distinctly from body proper, conical, base
about 20 7o of body width (Fig. 1, 3,9,13-15).
8) Swims moderately fast in spirals rotating about main body axis; not as fast as most congeners, fumbling to
and fro.
Similar species
Unequivocally separable from all other Monodinium and Didinium (2 cil\ary girdles) species by the peculiar al-
veolar layer, which is, however, recognizable only under high magnification. Thus, and because size and shape
differences are inconspicuous, most Monodinium and Didinium species must be checked with oi1 immersion or at
least a strong normal objective (40:1-60:1) to observe the cortex and the shape of the extrusomes; consider also
that dividing Monodinium spp. have two ciliary girdles, like Didinium spp. Monodinium armatum (PENARD'
1922) has a conspicuous peripheral fringe too, which, however, consists of large, fusiform extrusomes distinctly
different from the minute, ellipsoidal alveolar inclusions of M. alveolatum (see Fig. [b, c] in similar species sec-
tion of -+ M. balbianii breviproboscis).2 (proboscis present),5 (cortical alveoli, no symbiotic algae),6 (single
ciliary girdle) are key characters for identification.
t78

Gymnostomatea
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Planktonic and among macrophytes (Lemna, Hottonia; KAHL 1930) in ponds,
lakes, and large rivers. The locus classicus is in Hamburg, Germany, where KAHL (1930) discovered two speci-
mens in the pond of the botanical garden; another population occurred in water bodies of a rifle-range near the
village of Eppendorf. KAHL found both populations during winter. We observed Monodinium alveolatum inlhe
pelagial of the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria, in early October (Fig. 3-21). CHARDEZ (1986;
low quality illustration) found it near Li6ge, Belgium, and CANELLA (1954; with micrograph) near Ferrara, It-
aly, in February and May. VUXANOVICI (1961; with illustration) observed a rich population in an infusion
with plants from Lake Fundeni near Bucharest, Romania.
Records not substantiated by illustrations: rare and with low abundance in flooded meadows and road puddles
containing decaying plants, Bavaria, Germany, from May to August (DINGFELDER 1962); bottom of a polluted
fish pond in Poland (GRABACKA 1977); Lake Dzhandar, USSR (ALIEV 1988); 32 ind. cm-2 in the Parma
River, Italy (MADONI & GHETTI 1977); slightly saline rock pools in the supralittoral zone of the White Sea
(BURKOVSKY t97t).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on colonial flagellates (DINGFELDER 1962) md Gle-
nodinium (CANELLA 1954); we also observed food vacuoles with aubum inclusions. Biomass of 106 specimens
about 40 mg. Reliably recorded from Europe only. Oligo-euryhaline? Likely more common than indicated by lit-
erature data because presumable sometimes confused with taxa of the -+ M. balbianii group or not identified to
species level.
_PR
B-
G D
.I
_
FV
AL
I
ffi
2
-AL
l
3
Mottodinium alveolntum in vivo ( l, 2, from KAHL 1930; 3-8, originals of a population tiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg
University, Austria). 1: Type specimen, 65 pm. Note that KAHL even recognized the minute cilia of the dorsal brush (cp.
Fig. 13). 2: Optical section of cortex of type specimen (for detailed explanation, see Figures 6, 16-21).3: Representative
specimen from Salzburg population, 50 pm. 4: Slightly distorted specimen with globular trunk and broad proboscis. 5, 6:
Surface view and optical section ofcortex, which contains large (1-2 pm) alveoli each having a compact granule inside (Fig.
16, 2l). 7, 8: Monodinium alveolatum has two types of extrusomes in the proboscis and trunk: type I (Fig. 7) is elongate
clavate, asymmetrical, and about 7 x 0.5 pm; type 2 (Fig. 8) is rod-shaped and about 5 pm long. AL = cortical alveoli with
compact granules, DB = dorsal brush, EP = excretory pores of contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuole, GI = ciliary girdle,
MA = macronucleus, MT = mitochondria, PR = proboscis (oral dome).
119

Gymnostomatea
Monodinium alveolatum (originals of a population fiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria. 9-12, in vivo interf'erence con-
trast micrographs; 13-15, scanning elecffon micrographs). 9: Lateral view of a representative specimen. 1.0, 1l: Type 1 extrusomes, which
are elongate clavate and about 7 pm long. 12: Squeezed specimen. Arrow marks accumulation of extrusomes in compressed proboscis. 13:
Dorsal view showing proboscis, ciliary girdle, and dorsal brush, which is composed of 5 rows (arrows) of minute, paired, clavate cilia. 14:
Very early divider showing outgrowing cilia (arrows) for the girdle of the posterior daughter. 15: The ciliary girdle is composed of about
40-60 oblique, densely ciliated rows (pectinelles; arrows). AL = cortical älveoli, BA = rod-shaped, epibiontic bacteria, EP = excretory pores
of contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuole, GI = ciliary girdle, MA = macronucleus, PR = proboscis (oral dome).
r80

Gymnostomatea
Monodiniumalveolatum (originals. 16, 17, in vivo; l8-21, scanning electron nlicroglaphs). l6-21: This species has. underneath the cell
membrane (partially detached in the SEM-micrographs), a peculiar, 1.5 pm thick layer ofpolygonal alveoli, each containing a compact gran-
ule about 1 pm across. Figure 1 8 shows a postconjugate with a very flat proboscis. AL = cortical alveoli with granules, GI = ciliary girdle.
181

Gymnostomatea
Monodinium balbinnä subspecies balbianü rnsne-ooMERGUE, 1888 nov. stat.
1888 Monodinium balbianii FABRE-DOMERGUE, Annls Sci. nat., 5: 35.
l93O Didinium (Monodinium) balbianü FABRE-DOM. - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., l8: 125 (revision).
1979 Monodinium balbianii FABRE-DOMERGUE (1888) - FOISSNER, Int. Rev. ges. Hydrobiol.,64: 122 (re-
description from life and after silver impregnation).
1986 Monodinium balbian (FABRE-DOMERGUE, 1888) - DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS, Faune
tropicale, 26: 173 (short taxonomic monograph; incorrect subsequent spelling).
1989 Monodinium balbianii FABRE-DOMERGUE, 1888 - SONG & WILBERT, Lauterbornia,3: 23 (rede-
scription after silver impregnation).
1995 Monodinium balbianii FABRE-DOMERGUE, 1 888 FOISSNER, BERGER, BLATTERER & KOH-
MANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, Il95: 235 ("Ciliate-Atlas",
that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
Often incorrectly spelled "balbiani" (for example, MERMOD 1914, p. 37; NAUWERCK 1996, p. 156).
Mesodinium balbianii FABRE-DOMERGUE, 1888 in HARDOIM & HECKMAN (1996, p.371) is very likely
an unintended combination. Several authors (for example, eNnnE 1914, FINLAY et al. 1988, SCHEWIAKOFF
1889) mentioned zoochlorellae-bearing populations which were possibly -+ Monodinium chlorelligerum. Didin-
ium balbianä sensu GELEI (1954) is probably a -+ Didinium nasutum, and not a dividing M . balbianii, because
no division furrow is recognizable (FOISSNER et al. 1995).
We divide M. balbianii FABRE-DOMERGUE, 1888 into three subspecies, which differ mainly in the shape of
the proboscis (oral dome). This cone-shaped protrusion is moderately long and rather narrow in M. balbianii bal-
bianii; short, broad and depressed in -+ M. balbianii breviproboscis; and long and very narrow it -+ M. balbi-
anii rostratum. Possibly, further subspecies exist.
Differential iagnosis
d
1) Size in vivo 50-120 x 30-80 pm, usually 50-80 pm long.
2) Body slenderly to broadly cup-shaped with narrowly to widely rounded posterior end and moderately long
and rather narrow conical protrusion (proboscis, oral dome) in centre of anterior trunk end (Fig.2, 4, 16, 19,
21-30).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, reniform to horseshoe-shaped. Single globular micronucleus (Fig. 4, 18).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end (Fig.4,28).
5) Proboscis and trunk containing many 5-10 pm long, rod-shaped extrusomes (toxicysts; Fig. 4, 9, 18). Cortex
densely granulated (Fig. 5).
6) 54-80 (according to SONG & WILBERT about 100) basal body rows, which are ciliated only at the anterior
end, forming a conspicuous girdle (wreath of pectinelles; Fig. 1, 4,5,12,16,19,23,25,29). Undemeath cili-
ary wreath 5 rows of minute, paired cilia (dorsal brush; clearly recognizable only in silver slides and the scan-
ning electron microscope, not necessary for identification; Fig. 4, 5, 12, 19*22,24-:26).
7) Oral dome (proboscis) in centre of anterior trunk end projects distinctly from body proper, conical base about
20 Vo of body width (Fig. 1,4,5,16,11,19,27,30, 31).
8) Swims very fast in wide spirals rotating about main body axis.
t82

Gymnostomatea
Similar species
-+ Monodinium balbianii breviproboscis has a stout (about twice as broad as high), impressed oral dome, while
that of -+ M. balbianii rostratum is long and narrow. -+ Monodinium perrieri has curved extrusomes and the
ciliary girdle is distinctly indented in slightly compressed specimens. Monodinium vorax FAIJRß-FREMIET,
1945 is possibly a junior synonym of M. balbianii balbianii. -+ Monodinium chlorelligerum (needle-shaped ex-
trusomes) and -+ Didinium chlorelligerum (2 ciliary girdles) have symbiotic green algae. -+ Monodinium alveo-
latum has peculiar cortical alveoli, which are, however, recognizable only under high magnification. Monodin-
ium armatum (PENARD, 1922) has a conspicuous fünge of extrusomes (Fig. 14, 15; see M. balbianii brevipro-
boscis for details on this species). -+ Didinium nasutum is larger (usually 120-150 pm long) and has two ciliary
girdles (Attention! During division, Monodinium species also have two ciliary girdles but usually a more or less
distinct division furrow is recognizable, at least in late dividers; Fig. 6, 10, 11, 32-34). Inexperienced workers
may confuse M. balbianii balbianii with swarmers of -+ peritrichous ciliates (usually strongly contractile, no
proboscis) and middle-sized and large -+ oligotrichs (no proboscis, large adoral zone of membranelles), which
also swim very fast. 2 (rather narrow, moderately long proboscis), 5 (no symbiotic algae, no conspicuous cortical
alveoli), 6 (single ciliary girdle) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common throughout the year and often very abundant in the pelagial and among
macrophytes of eutrophic, stagnant water bodies; sometimes benthic and in running waters. Also in ephemeral wa-
ter bodies and terrestrial biotopes because resting cysts can be formed. Locus classicus is a pond in Pafls, France,
where M. balbianii balbianii occurred in great numbers during April (FABRE-DOMERGLIE 1888).
Records substantiated by illustrations: eutrophic ponds (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Bonn (WILBERT 1969,
SONG & WILBERT 1989) and Münster, Germany (MIYAKE & HARUMOTO 1996; common and sometimes
very abundant (up to 35 000 ind. l-t) in road puddles of Bavaria, Germany, from March to November (DING-
FELDER 1962); tp to 182 000 ind. l-r in a brackish water (0.4 7o salt) reservoir in northern Germany during late
May (AGATHA 1995); common and often very abundant in the benthal, the periphyton, the pelagial, and the
pleustal of small, alpine water bodies, especially during algal blooms (FOISSNER 1979c,1980b, FOISSNER et
al. 1995;Fig.4,5,16-34); Hungary (GELEI 1933); ditch water in South India (NAIDU 1965; illustrations of D.
nasutum and Monodinium balbianü confused); clear water bodies near Geneva, Switzerland (ROUX 1901); stag-
nant water from a drain in India during February (GULATI 1925); Lake Baikal and surroundings, USSR (GA-
JEWSKAJA 1933, LOKOT 1987); saprobic water in Cameroon (DRAGESCO 1970).
Records not substantiated by illustrations: mesotrophic lakes (Höllerersee, Mondsee) in Upper Austria (NAU-
WERCK 1996, SALBRECHTER & ARNDT 1994); up to 220 ind.l-1 in the surface plankton of groundwater
ponds in Austria (KRAINER 1988); polysaprobic water in Belgium (BERVOETS 1940); pond in Bohemia
(§VEC 1897); rain puddles in Finland (LEVANDER 1900); oligotrophic, mesoffophic and eu- to polytrophic
lakes in Germany (EHLERS 1965, PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991, VOIGT 1902); abundant in the winter plank-
ton of ponds in Germany (LAUTERBORN 1894); pond near Lake Balaton, Hungary, during winter (JACZÖ &
MANN 1940); fish ponds in Poland (KWIATKOWSKA-GRABACKA 1964); road puddles near Bratislava, Slo-
vakia, throughout the year with maxima during summer (MATIS 1966); thermal lakes in Slovakia (MATIS &
STRAKOVÄ-STRIE§KOVÄ tggt); reservoir near Barcelona, Spain (SALVADÖ CABRE 1993); up to
1500 ind. l-r in a highly eutrophic reservoir in Spain (SALVADO & GRACIA 1991); ponds and lakes (Pftiffiker-
see, Rottsee) in Switzerland (MERMOD 1914, MESSIKOMMER 1952, 1954, STEINMANN & SURBECK
1934); l5O ind.l-t in the Terterchay reservoir (ALEKPEROV 1983), and sometimes dominant in other Azerbai-
janian and Russian reservoirs (ALEKPEROV 1980, 1982,1984a, BELOVA 1989,1994, KORNIYENKO 1912,
KRAVCHENKO 1969, NEBRAT 1990, 1991, ZHARIKOV 1982, ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992); harchery
ponds in Azerbaijan (ALEKPEROV & KRYUCHKOV 1982); Ukrainian ponds (OLEKSIV 1985, 1985a, OLEK-
SIV et al. 1986); Lake Naroch, Lake Myastro, and Lake Sevan, USSR (LUK'JANOVIÖ 1973,1974, ZHARIKOV
1983); up to 165 ind. l-r in reservoirs of the USSR (MAMAEVA l976a,b); cooling basin of a power station in the
USSR (TIMOFEEVA 1989); Lake Donghu and Xiaoxihu Lake, China (GONG 1986, SONG et al. 1993); Lan-
183

Gymnostomatea
chou, China (NING et al. 1993); clear pools in India (BHATIA 1924); pond in Japan (MURAMATSU 1957);
Lake Cromwell, Canada (PUYTORAC et al. 1972); northern Pantanal, Brazil (HARDOIM & HECKMAN 1996);
permanently ice-covered lake in southem Victoria Land, Antarctica (CATHEY et al. 1982).
Several records from running waters, for example, lowland brooks in Germany (HEUSS 1976); Isebekkanal, a
slowly running, hypertrophic river in Hamburg, Germany (CASPERS & SCHULZ 1960); Danube River and its
ox-bows in Hungary (e.g., BERECZKY 1972, 1991); Volga River, Russia (MAMAEVA 1919b); Scioto River,
USA (LACKEY 1938b); further records from running waters, see FOISSNER et al. (1995). RIVERA et al.
(1987) counted 12700 ind. ml 1 in a waste-stabilization pond in Mexico at 11-15" C and pH 7.1 to 8.3. Also re-
corded from activated sludge (e. g., LUNA-PABELLO et al. 1996).
Several records, partially substantiated by illustrations, from terrestrial habitats (FOISSNER 1998), saline coastal
and inland waters (DAGAJEVA 1930, LEVANDER 1900, ARNDT I99l), and marine environments (AGA-
MALIEV 1976, HADA 1937, HARTWIG 1914, LACKEY & LACKEY 1970).
Autecological data: Feeds on autotrophic flagellates (green algae, Glenodinium) and (usually small) ciliates,
like Dexiostoma campylum and Tetralrymena pyrifurmis (DINGFELDER 1962, FOISSNER 1980b, GAJEWS-
KAJA 1933, SANTA ROSA 1984; Fig. 3l); Parameciumcan defend itself with the trichocysts and is thus not
captured; however, it is preyed on by + Didinium nasutum (MIYAKE & HARUMOTO 1996). Biomass of 106
medium-sized specimens 55 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1995) to L70 mg (NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK l99l).
Upper temperature limit 42" C (thermal lakes in Czechoslovakia; MATIS & STRAKOVÄ-STRIE§KOVÄ test;
and 52" C (road puddles in Bavaria; DINGFELDER 1962). Autecological data -+ Table.
Ecological summary: Very likely cosmopolitan because reliably recorded from Eurasia, Africa, and South
America. Planktonic and benthic in stagnant and running waters. Rare in terrestrial biotopes, although resting
cysts can be formed. Common in all seasons, that is, eurythermic and very likely holo-euryhaline. Omnivorous,
however, small (<100 ;rm) protists, not large paramecia, as in -+ Didinium nasutum, are preferred. Saprobic clas-
sification according to FOISSNER et al. (1995): oligosaprobic to alphamesosaprobic.
Table: Autecological data of Monodinium balbianü balbianü. Column 1, from PATRICK et al. (1967; several analyses from the Savannah
River, USA); column 2, from DETCHEVA (1983c; few analyses from the Maritza River, Bulgaria); columns 3, 4, from FOISSNER et al.
(1982; column 3, 36 analyses from small, alpine water bodies; column 4, two mass occurrences).
Parameters References
1 2 -Jt 4
Saprobity a b-a b-a
Frequency (7o) J-,
Temperature (' C) 2r.5-25.5 r-23 10123
pH 4.8-6.2 4.814.8
o, (mg I') >6-8 8.9 3.0-12.9 1 .tls.6
Oz (saturation 7o) 88 3l -t9r 82189
l')
BoDs (mg 0.8-<3 6.9 13-1 00r 5gl100'
NH+*-N (mg l') <0.02 0.21 0-10 0.181r.s4
NO: -N (mg 1') 0.14-<0.5 1.8 0-0.22 0/0
NOz -N (mg 1') <0.007 0-2.4 012.4
PO+3--P (mg t-') 0.01-0.03 0-0.57 0.0s/0.09
I KMnO+-cofl SUrrrption.
r84

Gymnostomatea
MI
MA
t
F'V
m'
W
PR
..>§{s otaa
7 .\\\>§: a
ro
MI
Wffi MA
W,.
W.
:.
W
15
12 14
Monodinium balbianü balbianü (1, fiom KAHL 1930 redrawn tiom FAURE-FREMIET 1924:2, tiom FABRE-
DOMERGUE 1888; 3, from BÜTSCHLI 1889; 4, 5, from FOISSNER 1979c;6,9-11, from PENARD 1922;7, from KAHL
1930; 8, from DINGFELDER 1962; 12, from SONG & WILBERT 1989; 13, from BHATIA 1936 redrawn from ROUX
1901. 1*3, 6-11, 13, in vivo; 4, composite from live and protargol-impregnated specimens; 5, silver nitrate impregnation
[eft], protargol impregnation [middle], and opalblue stain [right]; 12,protargol impregnation).1,2-4,8,13: Broad and slen-
der specimens,75pm,50-60pm,80pm,55-75pm,51pm,65pm.5: Silverline system and ciliary pattem (left), muco-
cysts (middle), and surface pattern (right). Shape of cell from life. 7: The variety nanum is almost globular and only
20*35 pm long (distinct species?). 9: Specimen with ejected extrusomes. 6, 10, 1L: Early, middle and late dividers (cp. Fig.
32*34). 12: Clliary pattem of dorsal side of a very early divider showing the anlage of the new ciliary girdle (arrow) for the
posterior daughter cell.
Monodinium armatum in vivo (14, 15, from PENARD 1922). 14, 15: This species differs from M. balbianii balbianii by
the conspicuous fringe of fusiform extrusomes, length of cell 50-60 pm.
CV = contractile vacuole, DB = dorsal brush, E = extrusomes, EP = excretory pores of contractile vacuole, FV = food vacu-
ole, GI = ciliary girdle (wreath of pectinelles), MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, N = nematodesmata (oral basket
rods), PR = proboscis (oral dome), SS = silverline system.
185





Gymnostomatea
27
Monodinium balbianü balbianü(21-30, fiom FOISSNER et al. 1995. 27-30, scanning electron micrographs). 27,28:. Anre-
rior and posterior polar view showing proboscis (diameter about 20 7o of body diameter in this subspecies), ciliary girdle
with metachronal waves, and many excretory pores (arrows in 28) of the contractile vacuole. 29: Representative specimen.
ln Monodinium the ciliature is reduced to an anterior girdle, which is composed of about 54-80 oblique "pectinelles", and
the brush, which consists of 5 short rows of minute, paired cilia (see Fig.24 for details); the brush defines the dorsal side of
radial-symmetric gymnostomes. The striation of the pellicle indicates the longitudinal arrangement of the unciliated portion
of the basal body rows (cp. Fig. 5, 12). 30: Broad specimen highly reminiscent on FABRE-DOMERGUE's illustration (Fig.
2). DB = dorsal brush, GI = ciliary girdle (wreath ofpectinelles), pft = proboscis (ora1 dome).
188

Gymnostomatea
MoÄodinium balbinnii balbianü (31-34, fiom FOISSNER et al. 1995. 31, 33, 34, scanning electron microgräphs; 32, pre-
served specimen). 31: Monodinium balbianii is, like all other didinids, a voracious predator. The anterior protrusion (probos-
cis or oral dome) opens widely during feeding because the prey (Tetrahymena, arrow) is ingested whole. 32-34: Middle di-
viders (32, 34) and very early divider (33). Arrows in (32,33) mark the new ciliary girdle for the posterior daughter cell; ar-
row in (34) denotes the indistinct division furrow with the excretory pores of the contractile vacuole of the anterior daughter
cell immediately above. These new excretory pores and the division furrow (only present in middle and late dividers) are
main characters for separating a dividing Monodinium balbianii from a non-dividing -» Didinium nasutum, which has 2 cili-
ary girdles (4 during division). Also pay attention to the size (-+ Didinium nasutum usually >100 pm) and the macronucleus,
which is rod-shaped and longitudinally arranged in late dividers (Fig. 10, 1 1). PR = proboscis (oral dome).
189

Gymnostomatea
M onodinium balbianü subspecie s breviprobo s cis nov. subspec.
D i ag n o s i s: As -+ M. balbianii balbianii, butwith very shortandbroad, impressedproboscis abouttwice as
broad as high (12 x 6 pm).
Typ e I o c ation: Pelagialof thepondatSalzburgUniversity, Austria (47"41'N,13"40'E).
Type slides: Twoslides (l holotype, l paratype)withprotargol-impregnatedspecimenshavebeendepos-
ited in the Oberösterreichische Landesmuseum in Linz (LI), Austria.
Ety mo I og y: Composite of theLatin wordsbrevis (short) andproboscis.
Taxonomy
This new subspecies was very common in summer 1997 and is possibly identical with the M. balbianii studied
by FAURE-FREMIET (1924), which, however, has symbiotic algae (Fig. tal of similar species). Monodinium
balbianii breviproboscis is very distinct due to the short and broad proboscis hardly projecting above body
proper (Fig. 1, 11, 13); however, in prepared specimens, this character and especially the ring-like impression of
the anterior cell end are less distinct because the body becomes slightly inflated (Fig. 19-21). All characters of
M. balbianii breviproboscis match those of --> M. balbianii balbianii, except for the short and broad proboscis,
which was very constant; thus, we separate it at subspecies level.
D i f f e re n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (detailedmorphometrics, see Table below)
1) Size in vivo 45-70 x 35-50 pm, usually about 55 x 40 pm.
2) Body shape highly variable, usually, however, obconical and slightly asymmetrical; anterior end transverse
truncate with circular groove around proboscis, posterior broadly rounded (Fig. l-4, 10-16, 19-21).
3) Macronucleus in anterior body half, surrounds oral basket, reniform to horseshoe-shaped, ends inflated (Fig.
1, 9, 10). Micronucleus not found.
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end, with an average of 6 excretory pores slightly out of pole centre
(Fig. l, 2, 9-12, 11, 20).
5) Three types of rod-shaped extrusomes in proboscis, oral basket, and trunk: type I about 2x0.3 pm, type 2
about 6 x 0.3 pm, type 3 about 15-20 x 0.5 pm (Fig. 6-8, 18, 28). Cortex densely granulated (Fig. 5).
Table : Morphom etric data f r om M o nodinium b alb ianü b re v ipr ob o s cis.
Characterr Mean M SD SE, CV Min Max n
Body, length (including proboscis) 48.3 48 3.9 0.9 8.0 40 55 t9
Body, maximum width 36.1 36 3.6 0.8 9.8 29 42 t9
Anterior proboscis end to ciliary girdle, dis- 1 1.3 10 r.6 0.4 t4.t 10 15 L9
tance
Proboscis, width near anterior end 1 1.6 t2 1.0 0.3 8.2 10 13 T9
Proboscis, height 5.6 6 1.0 0.2 18. 1 .Jl 1 t9
Macronucleus, maximum width t2.t t2 t.3 0.3 10.5 10 15 t9
Dorsal brush rows, number 5.0 5 0.0 0.0 0.0 5 5 t9
Somatic ciliary rows, number in 10 prm 5.8 6 0.6 0. 1 10.4 5 l T9
Excretory pores, number 5.8 6 0.8 0.2 t3.6 4 1 t9
I
Field specimens after protargol impregnation. Measurements in pm. CV = coefficient of variation in 7o, M = median, Max = maximum,
Mean = arithmetic mean, Min = minimum, n = numbet of specimens investigated, SD = standard deviation, SE = standard error of mean.
190

Gymnostomatea
6) About 67 basal body rows (as estimated from mean in 10 pm, see Table), which are ciliated only at the ante-
rior end, forming a conspicuous girdle (wreath of pectinelles; Fig. 1, 9-16, 19,21,21). Undemeath ciliary
wreath 5 rows of minute, paired cilia (dorsal brush; clearly recognizable only in silver slides and the scanning
electron microscope, not necessary for identification; Fig. 9 , 19 , 23-26).
7) Oral dome (proboscis) in centre of anterior trunk end, hardly projecting from body proper, broadly conical
(about 12 x 6 pm), that is, twice as broad as high (Fig. 14,9-16,19,21,22).
8) Swims moderately fast in wide spirals rotating about main body axis; not as fast as most congeners.
Similar species
Easy to identify due to the very short and broad, impressed proboscis. Transitions to -+ M. balbianii balbianii utd
--> M. perrieri, whose proboscis is conical and only about half as wide as that of M . balbianii breviproboscis (cp.
Fig.29 of -+ M. balbianii balbianii with Fig. 19 of M. balbianii breviproboscis), were not observed. There are,
however, two other species, which have a similar proboscis as M. balbianii breviproboscis, namely, M. armatum
(PENARD, 1922) nov. comb. (basionym: Didinium armatum PENARD, 1922) and Didinium impressum KAHL,
1926. Both are probably synonymous (KAHL 1930, p. 126) wrd have a conspicuous extrusome fringe (Fig. [b*e],
below); thus, they should be easily distinguished from M. balbianii breviproboscis.
Inexperienced workers may confuse the new subspecies with -+ M. chlorelligerum (with zoochlorellae), -+ M.
alveolatum (peculiar cortical alveoli, which are, however, recognizable only under high magnification), -+ M.
perrieri (long, acicular and short, distinctly curved extrusomes), and, because of the fast movement, with swarm-
ers of -> peritrichs (usually strongly contractile, no proboscis) and middle-sized and large -+ oligotrictns (no pro-
boscis, large adoral zone of membranelles). 2 (broad, short proboscis), 5 (no zoochlorellae, no conspicuous corti-
cal alveoli, only rod-shaped extrusomes), 6 (single ciliary girdle) are key characters for identification.
green algae, 65-95 pm (from FAURE-FREMIET 1924). b,c: Monodinium armatum has a very broad proboscis and a conspicuous fringe of
fusiform extrusomes, 50-60 pm (from PENARD 1922). d,, e: Didinium impressum has also a conspicuous fringe of alveoli containing rod-
shaped extrusomes, 50 pm (from KAHL 1926); thus, KAHL (1930) synonymized it with Monodinium armatum (PENARD). The proboscis
of D. impressum is deeply impressed, that is, does not project above body proper.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: As yet found only at type location, an artificial, eutrophic pond at Salzburg Uni-
versity, where M. balbianii breviproboscis occurred in considerable numbers during August.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on ciliates; autotrophic flagellates, which were present in
large numbers and variety, were not captured. Euplanktonic. Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens about
33 mg (our calculations). Possibly a rare species.
t9t

Gymnostomatea
,\
,\
/\
CV_ 1,
\..
-.'
SN 8S
ffi$ oa oo oo
ffi
ffi ffi
5rl
ffi
ffi
ffi ffi
67
8
PR
-G r
_MA
fP
Monodinium balbianü breviproboscis (l-8, in vivo; 9, 10, protargol inrpregnation). 1: Ventral view ol a leplesentative specimen, 60 pnr.
2.-4: Shape variability. 5: Cortical granulation. The granules are about 0.5 pm across and form stripes between the unciliated rows of basal
bodies (cp. Fig. 9). 6-8r Monodinium balbianii breviproboscis has 3 types of extrusomes, which differ mainly in size (2 pm, 6 pm,
15-20pm; drawn to scale).9: Ciliary pattemof dorsal side,55 pm. Arrowmarks dorsal brush. 10: In lateral view,M. balbianii breviprobos-
crs is asymmetrical, 52 pm. Note the short, broad proboscis, the subspecies character, which is filled with fines fibres and extrusomes. CV =
contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes, EP = excretory pores of contractile vacuole, GI = ciliary girdle, MA = macronucleus, PR = proboscis
(oral dome).
192

Gymnostomatea
,*Jü
lT
,:,,i:,,i
Monodinium balbianü breviproboscis ( I I , 18, in vivo interf'erence contrast micrographs; 12-17 , in vivo bright f ield micloglaphs; 19, 20,
scanning electron micrographs). 11-14, 16: Shape variability. Arrows mark the short, broad proboscis, the subspecies character. 15: Oblique
view. 17: Dividing specimen with two ciliary girdles (arrows). 18: Monodinium balbianii breviproboscis has 3 types of rod-shaped extru-
somes, namely, long (large arrow), middle-sized (arrowhead), and small (small arrow) ones. 19, 20: Dorsal and lateral view. Arrows mark
dorsal brush. Note asymmetrical body shape. CV = contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes, EP = excretory pores of contractile vacuole, FG =
fat globules, GI = ciliary girdle, OB = oral basket.
193

Gymnostomatea
Monodinium balbinnü breviproboscis (sczrrning electron micrographs). 21: Oblique view showing ring-like impression (marked by aster-
isks) around proboscis. Note the metachronal waves formed by the ciliary girdle. 22: The proboscis is about twice as broad as high. 23r 24:
The dorsal brush (arrows) consists of 5 short rows of minute, paired, clavatb cilia (cp. Fig. 9). BA = epibiontic bacteria, GI = ciliary girdle.
194

Gymnostomatea
Monodinium balbianü breviproboscis (25-27, scanning electror.r microglaphs; 2tl, in vivo intert'erence contrast micrograph). 25, 26: The
dorsal brush consists of 5 rows (arrows) of minute, paired, clavate cilia.27t Frontal view showing metachronal waves of ciliary girdle. 28:
The proboscis is filled with long (15-20pm, thick arrows), middle-sized (6pm, anowhead), and small (2pm, thin arrow) extrusomes,
which are used to capture prey. BA = epibiontic bacteria, GI = ciliary girdle.
t95

Gymnostomatea
Monodinium bulbinnä subspecies rostratum (KAHL,1926) nov. comb. nov. stat.
1926 Didinium nasutum var. rostratum KAHL, Arch. Protistenk., 55: 259,301.
1930 Didinium balbianii var. rostrdtum - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 126 (first reviser).
Taxonomy
KAHL (1926) established the variety rostrdtum within + Didinium nasutum because many specimens had two
ciliary girdles, that is, were dividing (Fig. 1,2).ln 1930, KAHL corrected this mistake by transferring it to Did-
inium balbianii. We combine D. halbianii rostratum with Monodinium, which was never done formally, al-
though DETCHEVA (1992, p.23) classified it as species, Monodinium rostratum, however, without providing a
reason. Details on subspecies separation, see same chapter under -+ M. balbianii balbianii.
Differential diagnosis
W
1) Length in vivo 65-100 pm.
2) Body globular to obovoidal with long and narrow, conical protrusion (proboscis, oral
dome) in centre of anterior trunk end (Fig. l-5).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, reniform to horseshoe-shaped (Fig. 1, 2).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end (Fig. 1-3).
s) Proboscis with many rod-shaped extrusomes (Fig. 1, 2,4,5).
6) Many (likely about 50-80) basal body rows, which are ciliated only at the anterior end,
forming a conspicuous girdle (wreath of pectinelles; Fig. 3, 5). Undemeath wreath 5
rows of minute, paired cilia (dorsal brush; clearly recognizable only in silver slides and
the scanning electron microscope, not necessary for identification; Fig. 3-6).
M onodinium balbianii
7) Oral dome (proboscis) in centre of anterior trunk end, very long (up to 55 Vo of body rostratum in vivo ( l,
proper) and narrowly conical (about 10 Vo ofbody width; Fig. 1-5). from KAHL 1930; 2,
from KAHL 1926). l,
8) Swims very fast in wide spirals rotating about main body axis. 2: Total views of divid-
ing specimens, 65 to
100 pm.
Similar species
-s Monodinium balbianii breviproboscis has a stout (about twice as broad as high) pro-
boscis. The proboscis of --> M. balbianii balbianii and -+ M. perrieri (with strongly curved extrusomes), which
is also rather nilrrow (about 20 7o vs. 10 %o of body width), is usually distinctly shorter than that of M. balbianii
rostratum. -+ Monodinium chlorelligerum (needle-shaped extrusomes) and -+ Didinium chlorelligerum (2 clli-
ary girdles), which often also has a very long and narrow proboscis, have symbiotic green algae. -+ Monodinium
alveolatum (proboscis as in -+ M. balbianii balbianii) has peculiar cortical alveoli, which are, however, recog-
nizable only under high magnification. 2 (long and narrow proboscis), 5 (no zoochlorellae, only rod-shaped ex-
trusomes), 6 (single ciliary girdle) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic in ponds, lakes, and large rivers. Locus classicus is a clear bog
pond near Hamburg, Germany (KAHL 1926, 1930). GELEI (1954; with illustration) observed it in a Hungarian
pond. We found M. balbianii rostatum in the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University (Fig. 3-6). CANELLA
(1954; with micrographs) observed it in Ferrara, Italy. Records not substantiated by illustrations: eutrophic pond
in Bonn, Germany (WILBERT 1969); ox-bow of Danube River in Hungary (BERECZKY & NOSEK 1995);res-
ervoirs in the USSR and Lake Baikal area (KRAVCHENKO 1969, LOKOT 1987, ZHARIKOV & ROTAR
196

Gymno§tomatea
1992); saline sites in Romania (TUCOLESCO 1962); Tibetan Plateau (WANG 1977); running waters near Sofia,
Bulgaria (DETCHEVA 1992);Yolga River (MAMAEVA 1919b).
Autecotogical data and ecological summary: Food not known; the long proboscis indicates specialization. Bio-
mass of 106 specimens 50 mg. Reliably recorded from Europe only. Euplanktonic, possibly not very common.
Monodinium balbianü rostralzm (oliginal scanning electron micrographs ol a population tion.r the pond at Salzbulg Univeßity). 3, 5: Lateral
and oblique frontal view. Arrowhead in (3) marks pores of contractile vacuole. 4: Middle divider. 6: The dorsal brush is composed of 5 rows
of minute, paired cilia. DB = dorsal brush, E = partially released extrusomes, GI = ciliary girdle, PR = proboscis (oral dome).
t9l

Gymnostomatea
M onodinium chlorelligerum KRAINER, ress
1995 M onodinium c hlor e lli g erum KRAINER, Lauterbomia, 2l : 48.
Taxonomy
aNnnE 0914), r'AURB-TREMIET (1924), FINLAY et al. (1988), and SCHEWIAKOFF (1889) mentioned ->
Monodinium balbianii populations with symbiotic green algae, indicating that they observed M. chlorelligerum.
In fact, this species is a good example that chlorotic (with symbiotic algae) and apochlorotic populations of the
"same" species are often different taxa. Monodinium chlorelligerum differs from -+ M. balbianii not only by the
symbiotic algae but also by the acicular extrusomes (cp. Fig. 15 with Fig.28 of -+ M. balbianii breviproboscis).
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 40-60 x 30-45 pm, usually around 50 pm.
2) Body globular with conical protrusion (proboscis, oral dome) in centre of anterior trunk end (Fig. 1, 4, 8, 9,
10,12, t6).
3) Macronucleus eccentric in mid-body, reniform,. Two globular micronuclei (Fig. 1, 1 3).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end (Fig. 1, 4,5,12).
s) Cells green due to about 50 symbiotic algae about 4-5 pm across (Fig. 1, 3, 8-10, 13,14). Proboscis with two
types of extrusomes (Fig. 1, 2, 13-15,23): type I rod-shaped and about 7-12 x 0.5 trrm; type 2 needle-shaped
and about 20 x 1 pm (our measurements; KRAINER states 3 pm, respectively, 6 pm, which does not match
his figure); in the cytoplasm often extrusome bundles, very likely from ingested -+ Limnostrombidium viride.
Cortex densely granulated (Fig. 22).
6) 40-60 basal body rows, which are ciliated only at the anterior end, forming a conspicuous girdle (wreath of
pectinelles; Fig. 1, 3,6,9, 12, 16-18). Underneath ciliary wreath 4 (according to our observations and
KRAINER's morphometric table; but 5 in his text and in Fig. 3; right row, however, very short) rows of min-
ute, paired cilia (dorsal brush; Fig. 1,3,16,11,20; clearly recognizable only in silver slides and the scanning
electron microscope, not necessary for identification).
1) Oral dome (proboscis) in centre of anterior trunk end, short to long-conical and thus indistinctly or distinctly
projecting from body proper (Fig. 1, 3-5,8-12,16-19).
8) Swims fast and undirected, often rotating on the spot and rummaging.
Similar species
Easy to separate from other -s Monodinium species due to the symbiotic green algae and, in silver slides, by the
four brush rows (a11 other species have >5). As concerns size and shape, it is easily confused with -+ M. perrieri
because both have a more or less distinctly indented ciliary girdle, especially when slightly distorted. -+ Didin-
ium chlorelligerum, which also has symbiotic green algae, is usually larger (80-100 pm) and has two ciliary gir-
dles. However, middle dividers of M. chlorelligerum are easily confused with Didinium chlorelligerumbecause
they also have two ciliary girdles and a similar size. 2 (proboscis), 5 (symbiotic algae and acicular extrusomes), 6
(single ciliary girdle) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic in lakes and ponds throughout the year. Locus classicus is the Leib-
nitzer Feld, a region south of Graz, Austria, where KRAINER (1988, 1995) discovered M. chlorelligeruminthe
198

Gymnostomatea
pelagial of a groundwater pond with a maximum of 856 ind. l-1 in August. We found it in the eutrophic pond at
Salzburg University, Austria, in late August (Fig. 8-23).
Records of -+ Monodinium balbianii with zoochlorellae, indicating that M. chlorelligerumwas observed: pro-
ductive pond in England (FINLAY et al. 1988; length 75 pm, which is rather large); together with apochlorotic
specimens in an aerated basin, probably in Germany (SCHEWIAKOFF 1889); plankton of Lake Geneva, Swit-
zerland, during December (ANDRE l9l4 Fig.7). The ANDRE (1914) population has a rather broad and short
proboscis, Ilke M. balbianii sensu FAURB-fnSN4mf (1924; also with symbiotic green algae,65-95 pm), re-
sembling --> M. balbianii breviproboscis.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on dinoflagellates (our observations) and 5-10 pm sized
algae (FINLAY et al. 1988, SCHEWIAKOFF 1889); it preys upon --> Limnostrombidium viride, whose extru-
some bundles can be found in the cytoplasm (our observations). Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens about
30 mg (our calculations). Reliably recorded from Europe only. Euplanktonic, occurs throughout the year, possi-
bly peaking in summer. Very likely more common than indicated by its late discovery; possibly sometimes iden-
tified as Monodinium sp. or -+ M. balbianii.
GI
,/\
DB
SA CV
ft'-
\
/)
6
Monodinium chlorelligerum (l-6, Iiom KRAINER 199-5; 7, lion ANDRE 1914. 1,2,4,5,7, in vivo; -1,6, protargol implegnation). I: Dor-
solateral view, 45 pm. 2z Monodinium chlorelligerum has two types of extrusomes (Fig. 15, 23): rype I is rod-shaped and "l-12 pm long,
type 2 is needle-shaped and about 20 pm long. According to KRAINER (1995), the extrusomes are only 3-4 prm, respectively, 6 pm long,
which does not match Figure 1. 3: Dorsolateral view of ciliary paltern,25 pm. Note fifth, very small brush row, possibly an exception be-
cause KRAINER states only 4 rows in the morphometry, which matches our observations (Fig. 16, 11,20).4,5: Shape variability. 6: Three
pectinelles (arrows) at high magnification. The basal bodies undemeath the pectinelles, which form the ciliary girdle, are unciliated (Fig. 16,
l7).7: Monodinium balbianii with symbiotic green algae from Lake Geneva, indicating that it was M. chlorelligerum,T5 pm. CG = cortical
granules,CV=contractilevacuole,DB=dorsalbrush,E=extrusomes,GI=ciliarygirdle,MA=macronucleus,Ml=micronucleus,N=
nematodesmata (oral basket rods), PR = proboscis (oral dome), SA = slightly ellipsoidal (5 x 4 pm) symbiotic green algae.
t99

Gymnostomatea
^
\t
\-J
B
l':'. ,'.'.l.l.'ll.l'. ..
'.1't':
Monodinium chktrelligerum (t'i-17, originals of a population ti"orn the eurrophic pond at Salzburg Uliver.sity. g 15, in vivo bright field and
interference contrast micrographs; 16, 17, scanning electron micrographs).8-10, 12: General views. The symbiotic green algae and the plas-
tids of the food organisms make cells dark in bright field. 11: Dividing specimen with two ciliary girdles (arrows). 13, 14: Squeezed speci-
mens showing macronucleus, extrusomes in proboscis and various inclusions, such as symbiotic algae, plastids of dinoflagellates, and fat
globules. 15: Monodiniunt chlorelligerunt has two types ofextrusomes: type 1 is rod-shaped andi-l2pm long, type 2 is needle-shaped and
20 pm long. 16' 17: Dorsal and oblique frontal view ofrepresentative specimens showing ciliary girdle and dorsal brush composed of4 short
ciliary rows with minute cilia (arrows). CG = cortical granules, CV = contractile vacuole, DB = dorsal brush, E = extrusomes, GI = ciliary
girdle, MA = macronucleus, pf, = proboscis (oral dome), PS = Pelagostrombidium, SA = symbiotic green algae.
200

Gymnostomatea
Monodinium chlorelligerum (18 23, originals of a population tiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria. l8-21, scanning
electron micrographs;22,23, in vivo interference contrast micrographs). 18, 19: Oblique frontal view and detail of anterior body portion of a
specimen colonized by rod-shaped bacteria.20: The dorsal brush of M. chlorelligerum consists of4 rows (arrowheads) ofminute, paired,
clavate cilia. This is an important species character because all other species usually have )5 brush rows. Arrows mark two rod-shaped epi-
biontic bacteria. 2l: Late divider. Arrow marks dorsal brush of posterior daughter cell. 22: T\e cortex contains numerous ellipsoidal, colour-
less granules 0.7-1.0 pm across. 23: Monodinium chlorelligerum has short (7-l2pm, arrow) rod-shaped and long (20 pm, arrowheads)
needle-shaped extrusomes. GI = ciliary girdle, PR = proboscis (oral dome).
20t

Gymnostomatea
Mottodinium perrieri DELPHY, 1s2s
1925 Monodinium perrieri DELPHY, Bull. Soc. zool. Fr., 50: 359.
1930 Didinium balbianii var. perrieri DELPHY, 1925 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 125 (revision).
Taxonomy
This species has been considered as doubtful because the characters provided by DELPHY (1925) appea.r unreli-
able (nucleus!) or hardly distinguish it from the common -+ M. balbianii, which is, indeed, very similar at super-
ficial observation. However, a more detailed analysis reveals two unique characters, which distinguish M. perri-
eri clearly from congeners, namely, the body shape of slightly squeezed specimens and a unique set of extru-
somes; the latter is, interestingly, found also in -+ Didinium chlorelligerum.The particular shape of M. perrieri
(Fig. l, 6, 13), well illustrated by DELPHY (Fig. 1), occurs only in slightly squeezed specimens; freely motile in-
dividuals (Fig. 5, l1) look very much like -+ M. balbianii balbianii. DELPHY recognized only the long type I
extrusomes, which he misinterpreted as oral basket rods. More problematic is the macronucleus, which DELPHY
describes and figures as an ellipsoidal mass divided by a light, transverse stripe (Fig. 1, 2). This type of nucleus
has never been found in any haptorid gymnostome, but is common in oligotrich ciliates, the preferred food of M.
perrieri; the light stripe is the replication band, a zorre of intensive DNA and histone synthesis. We thus suggest
that DELPHY misinterpreted a prey nucleus as nucleus of M. perrieri. Admittedly, this interpretation is some-
what risky, but plausible when the feeding strategy of the species (Fig. 5) and the rather superficial description of
DELPHY are taken into account.
Diilerential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 50-70 x 35-50 pm, usually around 60 pm long.
2) Body slenderly to broadly cup-shaped with moderately long, conical protrusion (proboscis, oral dome) in centre
of anterior trunk end (Fig. 5, I 1). Squeezed specimens distinctly constricted in girdle region (Fig. 1,6, 12-15).
3) Macronucleus in mid-body, reniform (Fig. 5, 6, 15, 16).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end (Fig. 1, 5, 15).
5) Four types of extrusomes in proboscis and trunk (Fig. l, 5,1-10, 18-23): type I (Fig. 7) needle-shaped,
slightly curved, 13-18 x 0.8 prm, forms conspicuous bundle in centre of proboscis; type 2 (Fig. 8) rod-shaped,
5-7 x0.4 pm, attached to anterior end of proboscis between type I toxicysts; type 3 (Fig. 9) slightly to dis-
tinctly thorn-shaped and curved, 8 x 0.8 pm, attached to cortex of anterior trunk portion; type 4 (Fig. 10) are
minute (0.3 pm across) cortical granules.
6) Many (likely about 55-80 as in -+ M. balbianii balbianii) basal body rows, which are ciliated only at the an-
terior end, forming a conspicuous girdle (wreath of pectinelles; Fig. 1, 5, 6, I l-15). Dorsal brush (-+ M. bal-
bianii balbiqnii) not yet described.
7) Oral dome (proboscis) in centre of anterior trunk end, projects rather distinctly from body proper, conical, base
about 20 Vo of body width (Fig. I , 5, 6, Il , 11).
8) Swims very fast to and fro, also spinning and jumping.
Similar species
Easy to separate from other -+ Monodinium species due to the unique set and arrangement of extrusomes (Fig.
5-10). The second character, the more or less distinctly indented ciliary girdle, occurs only in squeezed speci-
mens and in -+ M. chlorelligerum, which has, however, symbiotic green algae. -+ Didinium chlorelligerum,
which has a similar set of extrusomes as M. perrieri, has symbiotic green algae, two ciliary girdles, and is usually
larger (80-100 pm). 5 (symbiotic algae lacking, thorn-shaped extrusomes), 6 (single ciliary girdle) are key char-
acters for identification.
202

Gymnostomatea
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic in stagnant waters. The locus classicus is near Paris, where DEL-
PHY (1925) discovered M. pemieri in the surface plankton of a pond. We found it in the pond at Salzburg Uni-
versity in late July (Fig. 5-23), unfortunately after we had screened the Monodinium and Didinium literature.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on -+ Limnostrombidium viride (Fig.5). Biomass of 106
medium-sized specimens about 45 mg (our calculations). Reliably recorded from Europe only. Euplanktonic.
Very likely more common than indicated by literature data because possibly sometimes identified as Monodin-
ium sp. or confused with -+ M. balbianii.
PR_
-Gl
t
MA
.CV
t,
1Oi[äffiE
Monodiniumperrieriin vivo (l-3, tiont DELPHY 1925;4, fl'ont DELPHY 1925 redrawn by KAHL 1930;5-10, or-iginals t)-orn the pond at
Salzburg University). 1,4,6: General view ofslightly squeezed specimens (--+ taxonomy), which have a particular shape distinctly different
from that of freely motile specimens (Fig. 5), 50-60 pm. 2: Macronucleus (+ taxonomy). 3: Contractile vacuoles in posterior end. 5: Gen-
eral view of a representative, freely motile specimen, 60 pm. 7-10: Monodinium perrierihas, like --> Didinium chlorelligerum, four kinds of
extrusomes and is thus fairly easily distinguished from the congeners. CV = contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes, FV = food vacuole contain-
p(
ing platelets of the armour of -+ Limnostrombidium viride, GI = ciliary girdle, MA = macronucleus, = proboscis (oral dome).
203



Gymnostomatea
C y clotrichium viride cAJEwsKA A, ts33
J
1933 Cyclotrichium viride GAJEWSKAJA, Zoologica, Stuttg., 32: 40.
1935 Cyclotrichium limneticum KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 817 (in part, that is, Fig. 149s on p. 808; not Fig. 15ls
on p. 816, which shows -+ Pelagovasicola cinctum; new synonym, -+ taxonomy).
1986 Cyclotrichium limneticum KAHL, 1932 - WILBERT, Arch. Protistenk., 131: 60 (redescription from life
and after silver impregnation).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
Cyclotrichium ltmneticum in KAHL (1935, p. 808) is an incorrect original spelling. We consider C. limneticum
KAHL, 1935 (Fig. 2) as junior synonym of C. viride GAJEWSKAJA, 1933 (Fig. 1) because they agree in size,
shape, ciliature, and habitat (as concerns the symbiotic green algae, see below). The original description of C.
limneticum is a mixture of C. viride (Fig. 2) and -+ Pelagovasicola cinctum (Fig. 3 by P. cinctun), which
KAHL (1935) misinterpreted as divider of C. limneticum. Thts, C. limneticum should be considered as junior
synonym of C. viride and not of --> Pelagoyasicola cinctum, as suggested by KRAINER (1995), who did not rec-
ognize KAHL's mistake. Cyclotrichium limneticum sensu LOKOT (1987; Fig. 9) from the Lake Baikal area is
only 31-68;rm long; thus, identity with the present species is uncertain, inasmuch as LOKOT (1987) also men-
tioned C. viride in his species list.
The data about the symbiotic algae of C. viride are at variance. GAJEWSKAJA (1933) found only specimens
with numerous zoochlorellae, so that cells were bright-green. Furthermore, she did not find food inclusions al-
though checking numerous specimens. KAHL (1935) did not mention symbiotic green algae or any spBcial col-
our. The regularly arranged dots in his illustration (Fig. 2) are very likely the colourless granules he described
and which possibly correspond to the cortical alveoli (Fig. 21). WILBERT (1986a) mentioned that the more or
less distinct green colour of his population was caused by sequestered chloroplasts of ingested ) Limnostrom-
bidiumviride.In isolated specimens the chloroplasts were digested and the cells became colourless. We found
cells without, with few, and with many zoochlorellae, so that they appeared colourless to distinctly green. In
many specimens some of the algae were included in vacuoles and showed distinct signs of digestion; no similar
algae were found in the environment, indicating that the ciliates digested the symbionts. Considering all data, we
suggest that Cyclotrichium viride is facultatively apochlorotic.
Diflerential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 66-150 pm, usually 80-120 pm across; length usually slightly smaller than diameter (Fig. 1,4, l2).
2) Body roughly globular with anterior end slightly to distinctly flattened; cells thus usually slightly broader
than long (Fig. 1, 2,4,12,23).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, ellipsoidal (Fig. 1, 2,4,16,19).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end with single excretory pore and more than 100 radial collecting canals,
which extend to anterior body end; canals very fine and thus inconspicuous (Fig. 1, 14,20,24,27).
5) Cells usually slightly to distinctly green due to few to numerous algae 4-5 pm across (very likely zoochlorel-
lae; see discussion above; Fig. 1, 4,31,34). Cytoplasm, especially in oral region, with numerous, very thin
(like cilia), distinctly curved extrusomes 5-10 pm long (difficult to recognize, not necessary for
identification; Fig. 3). Cortex distinctly alveolated and fragile; alveoli usually degenerate to globular blisters
in specimens prepared for scanning electron microscopy (Fig. 2l , 24, 25 , 21 , 33 , 35, 36).
6) About 200 (188-251; n = 13) longitudinal ciliary rows, whose anterior end bears very densely spaced,
20-30 pm long cilia forming a conspicuous girdle (wreath of pectinelles). Cilia undemeath pectinelles incon-
spicuous, that is, only about 8 pm long and rather widely spaced because some of the many basal bodies are
unciliated. Near posterior pole a semicircular stripe of narrowly spaced, about 12 pm long cilia forming
ratherconspicuoustuft;posteriorpoleregionblank(Fig. 1,2,4,1,10-13,16-26,28,30,32).
205

Gymnostomatea
7) Oral dome very conspicuous, occupies entire anterior end, which is thus unciliated; slightly vaulted in undis-
turbed, almost hemispherical in distorted specimens; can open widely during ingestion of large food items
(Fig. 1, 2, 4, 5,7, t0-13, 15, 16, 28,29,32).
8) Swims very fast in wide spirals or spinning very rapid.
Similar species
All other Cyclotichium species are marine, except C. brunneum GAJEWSKAJA, 1933 (80-125 x 100-105 pm,
cytoplasm brownish, Lake Baikal), C. humilis (GAJEWSKAJA, 1933) KRAINER & FOISSNER, 1990
(25 x 56 pm, two ciliary girdles, Lake Baikal), and C. faurei (usually about 60 pm long, two ciliary girdles, lacks
zoochlorellae, Fig. 10 by -+ Pelagovasicola cinctum). -+ Pelagovasicola cinctun is slightly longer than wide,
has a reniform macronucleus, only about 20 conspicuous (because broad) vacuole canals, and 5--1 distinct ciliary
girdles. However, middle and late dividers of Cyclotrichium also have several ciliary girdles and are thus easily
confused with Pelagovasicola. The best character for separating Cyclotrichium dividers from normal Pelagovasi-
cola specimens is a contractile vacuole near mid-body and, in late dividers, the division furrow. -+ Monodinium
(anterior ciliary girdle llke Cyclott'ichium) and -+ Didinium (two ciliary girdles) species have a distinct protru-
sion (proboscis) in the centre of the anterior trunk end. Inexperienced workers may confuse C. viride with
swarrners of -+ peritrichs (usually strongly contractile; contractile vacuole near mid-body) and with large -+
oligotrichs (body conical; few, Iarge adoral membranelles; distinct buccal cavity; contractile vacuole indistinct)
because of the very fast movement. I (usually slightly broader than wide), 2 (no proboscis), 3, 4, 5 (cytoplasm
not brownish) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic in stagnant waters and large rivers. Locus classicus is Lake Baikal,
where C. viride caused green blooms in the warm (10-19o C) surface layer (GAJEWSKAJA 1933). KAHL
(1935) found C. limneticum in ponds (Alsteneiche) near Hamburg, and WILBERT (1986a) in the winter and
spring plankton of a eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Bonn, Germany. Our population occurred in the
May plankton of the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria (Fig. 3, 10-36). Records not substantiated by
illustrations: lower strata of the Khachinchay Reservoir in Azerbaijan (ALEKPEROV 1984a); with up to 9.27o
dominance in the betamesosaprobic Kanev reservoir and other reservoirs in the USSR (MYLNIKOV A 1992b,
NEBRAT I99I,ZHUKOV & MAMAEVA 1978); Ukrainian ponds and reservoirs (NEBRAT 1980, OLEKSIV
et al. 1986); Lake Onega, Russia (KUSTOVLYANKINA 1990); Lake Baikal area, Russia (LOKOT 1987; -+
taxonomy); Volga River, Russia (MAMAEVA 1919,1919b).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on -+ Limnostrombidiumviride,whose extrusomes are of-
ten recognizable within the predator (KAHL 1935), and other ciliates (Naxella sp., -+ Tintinnidium pusillum), as
well as bacteria, diatoms, and possibly other algae (our observations). Cyclotrichium viride itself is predated by
Syncheata and Leptodora kindtii (GAJEWSKAJA 1933). Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens about 500 mg
(our calculations). GAJEWSKAJA (1933) recorded C. viride at 10-19" C and 8.0-12.8 mg l-1 Oz. WILBERT
(1986a) found it at following conditions: 2.1-5.5" C, pH 7.9-8.4,8.+-26.8mg1-r Oz,0-0.4mgl-rNH+*-N,
0 mg I I NOz--N, 4.6-13.2 mg lr NO3-N. Reliably recorded from Lake Baikal and Europe only. Not very com-
(
mon but sometimes causing green blooms. Euplanktonic and eurythermic in lakes and ponds. Omnivorous.
Cyclotrichium viride ( 1, from GAJEWSKAJA 1933; 2,
k( from KAHL 1935; 3, original of a population from the
pond at Salzburg University, Austria. 1-3, in vivo). l,2:
Total views (15 x 95 pm, 100 pm) showing prominent
anterior ciliary girdle encircling large oral dome, semi-
circular ciliary tuft (arrows) near rear end, and contrac-
tile vacuole with many radial collecting canals (2). 3:
The extrusomes are slightly to distinctly curved and thin
like cilia; thus they were overlooked by previous
authors. GI = ciliary girdle.
206

Gymnostomatea
MA
l-
G
CR
o
..? /. i$:f-?3-$ii i ft!.iil:..-.ii.'.'-'
/.G I
CO
GI
Cyclotrichium viride l4-8, liom WILBERT 1986a.4, in vivo; -5-ll, protargol irnprcgr.ration).4: Total view, dixmcter 66 96pm, nrean =
81 pm. Arrow marks micronucleus.5: Anterior portion of ciliary rows with pectinelles forming ciliary girdle, circumoral ciliary row com-
posed ofbasal body pairs, and oral basket rods (nematodesmata). 6,7: Posterior (?0 pm) and anterior (90 pm) polar view ofciliary pattern.
The dark patch of basal bodies at the posterior end of some ciliary rows in Figure 6 bears elongated cilia, which form the posterior tuft (Fig.
4,24-26).8: Middte divider. C = somatic cilia, CO = circumoral ciliary row, CR = somatic ciliary rows, CV = contractile vacuole, GI = citi-
ary girdle (wreath of pectinelles), MA = macronucleus, N = nematodesmata (oral basket rods), SA = sequestered chloroplasts of ingested -->
Limnostrombidium viride, TU = semicircular ciliary tuft near rear end.
Cyclotrichium lilnneticum sensu LOKOT (1987). 9: This somewhat superf,rcially described population is only 3l-68 x26-62 pm' indicating
misidentification.
201

Gymnostomatea
Cyclotrichium uiride (originals of a population liorn the pond at Salzburg University. 10, ll, 14, ir.r vivo; 12, 15, scanning nricr.ogr.aphs; 13,
silver carbonate impregnation). 10, 11, 15: Anterior polar views showing prominent ciliary girdle. 12: Total view. 13: Ciliary girdle. 14:
Posterior polar view showing the contractile vacuole (asterisk) with numerous, fine, radial collecting canals (bright lines). C = cilia, CO =
circumoral ciliary row, GI = ciliary girdle, N = oral basket rods, OD = oral dome, TU = semicircular ciliary tuft near rear end.
208

Gymnostomatea
MI
\
*.
w*
,+,juffi
* ..+:.
ffi,,,,..*, b ,;'f&*',fr
Cyclotrichium viride 116-22, originals of a populatior.r ti'om the pond at Salzbulg University. l6-18, 22, protargol iurpreguatiotr; 19, silver
carbonate impregnation; 20,21,in vivo interference contrast micrographs). 16-18,22:, Ciliary pattem in lateral (16) and frontal (17) view
and details (18,22). Arrow in (16) marks posterior end ofbasal body rows. 19: Micronucleus and macronucleus with large nucleoli. 20: The
contractile vacuole has numerous collecting canals (arrows), which extend to the wreath of pectinelles. 2l: Surface view of a slightly dis-
torted specimen showing polygonal cortical alveoli (cp. Fig. 24,2». CA = circumoral ciliary row composed of basal body pairs, CR = cili-
ary rows, GI = ciliary girdle, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, N = nematodesmata (oral basket rods), OD = oral dome.
209

Gymnostomatea
""*'fi1w
',r.iil:tt
&
!r.::,
,t!
..fi.:
:*.:': '*'
4:,
t?!:t &_
,"4, *t:
,*,
7t: :.I' & |*i,, &
,,,2|| tt',,..,,n,'"'
Cyclotrichium viride \23-27, originals of a population fiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria. 23-25, 27, scanning elecrron
micrographs; 26, protargol impregnation). 23: Oblique anterior polar view showing huge oral dome surrounded by prominent ciliary girdle.
24-26: Posterior pole region showing semicircular (arrows in 26) ciliary tuft composed of elongated (about 12 pm), narrowly spaced cilia.
Most of the cell membrane (asterisk in 25) detached and the cortical alveoli degenerated to small blisters due to the preparation procedures
(cp. Fig. 21,27).27: The contractile vacuole of Cyclotrichium viridehas a single, large excretory pore. CR = longitudinal ciliary rows, EP =
excretory pore of contractile vacuole, GI = ciliav girdle (wreath of pectinelles), OD = oral dome, TU = semicircular tuft of elongated cilia.
210

Gymnostomatea
,ffi';,
'l!Y.!
,ffi
W:t8I*:
M .'fWf,ii.
'fWfi;r::
IW
.:ffi|
. :':ii:iiil
Cyclotrichium viri.de \28-32, originals of a population i'om the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria. 28, 32, scannirrg electron
micrographs; 29, 30, protargol impregnation; 31, in vivo bright field micrograph). 28: Anterior polar view showing the huge oral dome en-
circled by the prominent ciliary girdle shown in detail in Figures 29, 30,32.29,30, 32: Parts of circumoral ciliary row (arrows in 32) and
ciliary girdle (wreath of pectinelles), which is composed of about 200 short rows of zigzagging basal bodies. 31: Cytoplasm with a vacuole
(arrow) containing decaying cleptoplasts. CO = circumoral ciliary row,composed ofbasal body pairs (not recognizable in live specimens),
GI = ciliary girdle (wreath of pectinelles), N = nematodesmata (oral basket rods), OD = oral dome.
2tt

Gymnostomatea
u.,,.",' , t:,."'
tff'*ir.}.;rt,it:*tt.*tit'-
r Xjl. , n
f'*
:':i:"':*."
:.:;.. ':iYffi:{':
wtht b'! '* *..Y nl Wa ,A# f)a
- Y* ;;»h /t.'ry
35
Cyclotrichium viride 133-36, originals of a population tiorn the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria. 33, 36, scanning electron
micrographs; 34, in vivo interference contrast micrograph; 35, silver carbonate impregnation). 33, 35, 36: Anterior polar views (33, 36) and
squashed specimen (35) showing details of the fragile cortex. The cortical alveoli degenerated to small, globular blisters due to the prepara-
tion procedures. In some areas (asterisk) ofFigure 33 and in Figure 35 the polygonal pattem ofthe cortical alveoli has maintained (cp. Fig.
2l). Cyclotrichium viride has an huge oral dome, which opens in the slightly depressed centre during prey uptake. The dome can open very
widely when large food items, such as ciliates, are ingested. 34: Cytoplasm with cleptoplasts or zoochlorellae (arrows). GI = ciliary girdle
(wreath of pectinelles), OD = oral dome.
212

Gymnostomatea
Pelagovasicola cinctum ryorcr, 1e01) JANKowsKr, 1e80
l9}l Didinium cinctum VOIGT, Zool. Anz.,25: 36 (sufficient description without illustration).
1902 Didinium cinctum VOIGT, 1901 - VOIGT, ForschBer. biol. Stn PIön, 9: 35 (detailed description with il-
Iustration).
1924 Dinophrya lieberkühni BÜTSCHLI - FAURE-FREMIET, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg., 6: 25 (misidentification).
l93O Didinium cinctum VOIGT, 1900 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 123 (revision; incorrect date).
1930 Didiniumfaurei KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 125 (revision; synonym; -+ taxonomy).
1933 Didinium cinctum VOIGT- GAJEWSKAJA,Zoologica, Stuttg., 32:37 (record substantiated by illustration).
1935 Cyclotichium limneticum KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 817 (in part, that is, Fig. 15ls on p. 816; not Fig. 149:
on p. 808, which is very likely -+ Cyclotrichium viride; -+ taxonomy).
1980 Pelagovasicola cinctum (VOIGT) -JANKOWSKI, Trudy zool. Inst., kningr., 94: 118 (combining author).
1995 Pelagovasicola cinctum (VOIGT 1902) JANKOWSKI 1980 - KRAINER, Lauterbornia,2l:45 (rede-
scription from life and after silver impregnation).
Taxonomy
Dinophrya lieberkühni BÜTSCHLI (now widely considered to be a junior synonym of Acropisthium mutabile
PERTY) in FAURE-FREMIET (1924) is a misidentification already recognized by KAHL (1930). Furthermore,
KAHL doubted identity of Didinium cinctum VOIGT and Dinophrya lieberkühni sensu FAURE-FREMIET; ac-
cordingly, he established a new species for FAURE-FREMIET's population, namely, Didiniumfaurei. However,
we agree with KRAINER (1995) that FAURE-FREMIET's population belongs to D. cinctum VOIGT. In 1935
KAHL described Cyclotrichium limneticum and provided two figures, the second he designated as divider (here
reproduced as Fig. 3). In our opinion, it shows D. cinctum VOIGT. This matches KRAINER's interpretation,
who, however, also assigned KAHL's first figure to D. cinctum. This is a mistake, as is obvious by comparison
of the original figures of -+ C. viride and C. limneticum KAHL (Fig. 2 by -+ C. viride), that is, KAHL's figure
undoubtedly shows a Cyclotichium, very likely -+ C. viride GAJEWSKAJA.
Diilerential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 50-180 x 40-85 trrm, usually about 100 pm long.
2) Body obovoidal, that is, anterior end broadly rounded or even transversely truncate, posterior end narrowly
rounded (Fig. 1-4, ll, 22, 23, 31, 32).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, reniform (Fig.14,29).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end with about 20 radial collecting canals, which extend to anterior body end.
The canals are broad (important difference to -+ Cyclotrichium) and thus conspicuous (Fig. 1-4, 5, 1 , 2l , 33).
s) Cells brownish to orange, sometimes even greenish, very likely due to plastids of ingested organisms (Fig. 5,
21,22,31,35). Furthermore, this species often contains green algae about 5pm across, which look very
much like zoochlorellae (FAURE-FREMIET 1924, Fig. 35, own observations). Extrusomes filiform (thus
overlooked by previous authors), about 30 pm long, attached mainly to margin of oral dome and occasionally
extruded as bundles of fine filaments looking like long membranelles (Fig. 16, 19,29, 30,34); KRAINER
found acicular extrusomes and assumed that they were from ingested ciliates.
6) 88-127 ciliary rows arranged in 5-7 distinct girdles, which become nilrower from anterior to posterior; last
ciliary (basal body) girdle, occupying posterior fifth of cell, unciliated, except posteriormost basal bodies;
posteriorpoleblank(Fig.1-9, Il-14,11-20,24,25-34). Dorsalbrushprobablylacking.
7) Oral dome very conspicuous, occupies almost entire anterior end, which is thus unciliated; slightly vaulted in
undisturbed, almost hemispherical in distorted specimens, can open widely during ingestion of large food
items (Fig. 14, 8, ll, 13, 14, 17, 22, 3l).
2t3

Gymnostomatea
8) Swims very fast, occasionally spinning with ciliary girdles forming conspicuous metachronal waves.
Similar species
Pelagovasicola JANKOWSKI, 1980 is monotypic, that is, contains only P. cinctum. --> Cyclotrichium viride is
often broader than long, has much more and very fine collecting canals associated with the contractile vacuole,
an ellipsoidal macronucleus, and only one distinct ciliary girdle. Cyclotrichiumfaurei (KAHL, 1930) KRAINER
& FOISSNER, 1990 is usually smaller (about 60 pm) and has only two distinct ciliary girdles (Fig. 10). -->
Monodinium spp. (one ciliary girdle) and -+ Didinium spp. (two ciliary girdles) usually have a conspicuous pro-
boscis, and the contractile vacuole lacks collecting canals. 2 (no proboscis), 3,4, 6 (five to seven ciliary girdles)
are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic and often abundant, but not common. Locus classicus is the Plön
area, northern Germany, where VOIGT (1901, 1902a) found high numbers of P. cinctum in the "Kleinen Uglei-
See" during early April. FAURE-FREMIET (1924) fotnd"Dinophrya lieberkühni" in a pond of the Oise Valley
near Paris, France. GAJEWSKAJA (1933) observed high numbers of P. cinctum in the surface plankton of the
Bargusin Bay, Lake Baikal, at 6.8" C; it occurred only over a very short period, as also noted by VOIGT (1902a).
KAHL (1935) foundP. cinctum in ponds (Alsterteiche) nearHamburg, Germany. KRAINER (1988, 1995) ob-
served it in clean groundwater ponds of Styria, Austria, throughout the year (84 ind. l-r in January, 70 ind. I' in
August). BUISÄN 0944) recorded it with low abundance from the pond at the University of Barcelona, Spain.
We found P. cinctum in the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria, during March (Fig. 11-30), and P.
MAYER collected it from a small bog pond near Constance, Germany (Fig. 3l-34).
Records not substantiated by illustrations: pond near Kiev, Ukraine, in January (OVALCHUK & SVINTSOVA
1994); Ukrainian reservoirs (NEBRAT 1980); Ladoga Lake, Russia (SMIRNOVA 1987); Balkhash Lake, Ka-
zakhstan (TROSHINA 1994);Lake Donghu, Wuhan, China, during summer (GONG 1986); mesotrophic and hy-
pereutrophic lakes in Florida, USA (BEAVER & CRISMAN 1989a). ALEKPEROV (1990) observed a daily ver-
tical migration in Azerbaijanian reservoirs with highest numbers in the surface plankton during day and peaks in
deeper strata during night. KAL-
MUS (1928) found P elagovasi-
cola cinctum during February in
the sediment of the Moldau
River, Czechoslovakia, indicat-
ing misidentitication.
Autecological data and ecologi-
cal summary: Omnivorous, feeds
on bacteria, cyanob acteria, dia-
toms (Cyclotella sp.), ciliates (-+
strombidiids), and Bosmina sp.
(KAHL t935, KRAINER tggl);
according to our observations,
green algae and chrysomonads are
also ingested. Biomass of 106
medium-sized specimens about
250 mg (our calculations). Relia-
bly recorded from Europe and
Asia only. Euplanktonic in lakes
I'elugovctsicoltt cittctturt ( l. li'onr GAJEWSKAJA 1933; r, ll'orn tstJISAN l9-1-l; 3, ironr KAHL and ponds. Not as common as
1935; 4, from VOIGT 1902a). 1-4: Total views in vivo, 120 pm, 136-180 pm, 100 prm, some other gymnostome ciliates.
108-136 pm. Arrows mark ciliary girdles. CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus.
2t4

Gymnostomatea
-co
,\
MI t
MA
/\
t-:
G
I \ \a\a\J
CV
:'
6
SS
rt//t
,l\.
7
Pelagovasicola cinctum (5, 6, 8, 9, fror-r-r KRAINER 1995; 7. ll'onr FAL.IRE-
FREMIET 1924. 5, J, in vivo; 6, B, 9, protargol impregnation). 5, 7: Total
views, 70 pm, 100 x 75 pm. Note radial collecting canals of the contractile
vacuole and the conspicuous ciliary girdles. 6: Anterior portion of a ciliary row
at high magnification, showing a basal body pair (with long cilium) of the cir-
cumoral ciliary row and the pectinelles (narrowly spaced cilia) of the anterior
four ciliary girdles. 8: Total view of ciliary pattern. Note conspicuous oral bas-
ket composed of many fine rods (nematodesmata).9: Oblique posterior polar
view of ciliary pattern (cp. Fig. 25). CC = radial collecting canals of contractile
vacuole, CO = circumoral ciliary row with whip-like cilia (possibly misidenti-
fied, exploded toxicysts), CR = sparsely ciliated (thus not forming ciliary gir-
dles) portion of longitudinal basal body rows, CV = contractile vacuole, GI =
ciliary girdles, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, N = nematodesmata
(oral basket rods), SS = silverline system after Klein-Foissner silver nitrate im-
pregnation.
Cyclotrichium faurei in vivo (10, from KAHL 1930 redrawn from FAURE-
FREMIET 1924).10: Total view, 60 trrm.
215



Gymnostomatea
;,:,:; ti:,.,,,,ffi11
.i!ri:i rti:iilt:ir:iiti:är:!',
Ei
i:t::::l:'::il::l:i!i
iI..'.il,'i
..ü*.s4l: trltti#n
**
#i' "p tt',, ti& #,u t, 1!: *: .*1"
,,,,*!t t:tt:f:::ft::il ,-,t,:t:.. !ii|r.y,f#fi
t :*0,,,1*
*l
,:,*,':",' '1.;;*.r.;,t,,,,,,,':: f,,.,*: *, *".,o;,;,,,r,,,:., tittitt''
# :;.b.i:t,,"
4:
\
Pebgovasicola cinctum ( I 7-20, originals of a population fiom the pond at Salzburg University. I 7, scanning electron micrograph; I 8-20, sil-
ver carbonate impregnation). 17, 20: Oblique anterior polar views showing huge, unciliated oral dome surrounded by a circumoral ciliary row
composed of paired basal bodies. 18, 19: Pelagovasicola cinctum has 5-7 girdles (arrows) of narrowly spaced cilia; girdles (pectinelles) be-
come smaller from anterior to posterior. The basal bodies in the posterior body portion (arrowheads in 18 and 19) are comparatively widely
spaced and unciliated, except at the end of the rows (Fig. 1 1). Note bundles of 3G40 pm long, fine extrusomes at margin of oral dome. CO =
circumoral ciliary row, E = extrusomes, F = fibres originating from circumoral row, GI = ciliary girdles, OD = oral dome.
217

Gymnostomatea
*"
tüW"'/:l; ,f ', 'f #fi *ff i
CHw' ". u L
. il ,ffifr'**1
:::li::' .', *,,,,;:w.,a,#:,.;' ,i:i 't:n "nn 'ifi, ffi 7a ?a|
v'i#,'&,#'lrffii,WW,ff,|i? 4,.i'1*,'1r%uwr4%r'r4',,
tffi::ffi%,,%:&-A_WruT,'T,u,T,%,ui''",\.
ryawww:%'qkuo\\'
LWU\uu
*'}]Läa
-:i:'t'
rtfr,rl{rti'ry,n*r*uu§til§
It'I #}i t §'**
r.f §§{§'f
l.'
lt
l§r t#,*4, I
"'i'§
25 26
graphs;23, bright field micrograph of preserved specimen; 24-26, silver carbonate impregnation). 21: Posterior portion showing the broad
canals ofthe contractile vacuole. 22,23: Slightly squeezed live specimen and unsqueezed, preserved cell. Note conspicuous oral dome (ar-
rowheads). 24,25: Ciliary pattem showing narrowly spaced basal bodies (pectinelles) of ciliary girdles and unciliated posterio4 pole (arrow-
heads). 26: Ciliary pattem of an early divider proliferating basal bodies in mid-body (arrow; cp. Fig. 28). CC = collecting canals of contrac-
tile vacuole, CO = circumoral ciliary row composed ofbasal body pairs, E = extrusomes, OD = oral dome.
2t8

Gymnostomatea
r?l/i// /"// /i// i// // i//j /&y/,|N//? -N ./#/g ,f /if //ri /,&!# ia,, :tw :Ma!/tl.'a'
29 30
Pelagovasicola cinctum (27-30, originals ol a population lrour the eutrophic pond at Salzburg Univcrsity, Austria. 27, it.t vivo interl'crcnce
contrast micrograph; 28, scanning electron micrograph; 29, 30, silver carbonate impregnation). 27: Squashed specimen showing the genus-
specific ciliary girdles (arrowheads; cp. Figure 30). Anow denotes the circumoral ciliary row, which is composed ofbasal body pairs (bright
dots), from which fibres originate and extend on the oral dome. 28: Total view of a middle divider showing a developing ciliary girdle (ar-
row) slightly above mid-body.29,30: Ciliary pattern, reniform macronucleus, and long extrusomes. Note regularly arranged pectinelles
(short rows of narrowly spaced cilia), which form conspicuous ciliary girdles (arrows), the main genus character of Pelagovasicola. E = ex-
trusomes, F = fibres, MA = reniform macronucleus.
219



Gymnostomatea
Paradileptus elephantinus (§vpc, 18e7) KAHL, 1e31
1897 Dileptus elephantinus SVBC, Bull. int. Acad. tch6que Sci., 4: 41.
1929 Paradileptus robuslus WENRICH, Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 48: 357 (Fig. 5; synonymy proposed by
KAHL 1931).
1929 Paradileptus conicus WENRICH, Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 48: 353 (Fig. 6,7,9; synonymy proposed by
KRAINER 1988 and FOISSNBR et al. 1995).
l93l Paradileptus (Dileptus) elephantinzs (SVEC, 1897) - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl.,2l:210 (revision; combining
author).
7931 Tentaculiftra mexicana SOKOLOFF, An. Inst. Biol. Univ. M6x.,2: 165 (synonymy proposed by KAHL
193s).
1935 Paradileptus elephantinus SYEC,1897 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 823 (revision;Fig.3,4).
1935 Paradileptus conicus WENRICH 1929 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 823 (revision; Fig. 1).
1945 Paradileptus ovalis HUBER-PESTALOZZI, Vjschr. naturf. Ges. Zürich, 90: 123 (new synonym; Fig.
13).
l95l Paradileptus estensir CANELLA, Annali Univ. Ferrara, 1: 81 (Fig. 19-22; possibly a distinct species be-
cause very slender and 600-800 pm long, occasionally up to 1200 pm).
1972 Paradileptus minutus DRAGESCO, Annls Fac. Sci. Univ. f6d. Cameroun, 9: 90 (Fig. 23; new synonym;
very likely an injured specimen).
1986 Paradileptus elephantinus (SYEC, 1897) and Paradileptus minutus DRAGESCO, 1972 - DRAGESCO &
DRAGESCO-KERNEIS, Faune tropical e 26 165, I 66 (brief taxonomic monograph).
1995 Paradileptus elephantinus (§YEC,1897) KAHL, 1931- FOISSNER, BERGER, BLATTEREB. & KOH-
MANN, Informationsbesighte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll95: 203 ("Ciliate-Atlas",
that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
This species is somewhat variable in size, shape, and nuclear apparatus and, more importantly, very fragile. Spe-
cifically, the obconical trunk shape and the tail are delicate and thus usually present only in freshly collected ma-
terial (Fig. 6,26-30). The tail disappears rapidly and the cell becomes bulky,looking like P. elephantinus sensu
§VpC (tSgZ), when the environment becomes unfavourable. Thus, we suppose synonymy of most or all species
listed above. They diverge from each other and from P. elephantinus by differences in body size and/or shape
and/or number ofmacronuclear nodules. The last character has been used by several authors, but is doubtful be-
cause it has a fairly high intrapopulation variability (&-14, mean = 11.9 nodules in Australian population; 7-20
nodules inthe 1994 Salzburg population; 5-9, mean = 6.9 nodules in the 1997 Salzburg population; only 1[!]
nodule in half of specimens in a collection made one month later) indicating that the differences between popula-
tions must not be over-interpreted. Thus, all these taxa are inseparable, at least at the present stage ofknowledge;
at best, they can be considered as subspecies or ecoforms. Paradileptus flagellatus (ROUSSELET, 1890) WEN-
RICH, 1929 is possibly a further synonym; however, ROUSSELET (1890) described only two macronuclear
nodules, which prevent definite synonymization.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 100-450 x 10V240 pm, usually 150-350 pm long; proboscis almost as long as trunk.
2) Body (trunk) usually obconical, that is, tapering posteriorly to tail-like process, obliquely truncated
anteriorly, providing a wide, cup-shaped oral field with raised border (flange, rim) prolonged dorsally into a
spirally wound proboscis (Fig. 1, 6, ll, 14, 15,26-30,3743,47). Trunk of distorted specimens bursiform to
globular (-+ taxonomy; Fig. 2,3,5,13,24,31).
3) Macronucleus in longitudinal axis of trunk, moniliform, composed of 4-40, usually 10-20 globular nodules
often forming S-shaped figure within tubular membrane (Fi5.2,3, 5,6, 13, L4,23,24,31,32, 44).
4) Manycontractilevacuolesindorsalsideofproboscisandperipheryoftrunk(Fig.2,5,11,14,21-29,36,52).
221

Gymnostomatea
s) Cytoplasm brownish, without symbiotic green algae. Many rod-shaped, about 4 pm long extrusomes in oral
bulge and numerous, closely spaced rodlets 2-3 ,pm long undemeath pellicle, forming more or less distinct
fringe (Fig. 5, 6, 14, 34, 35, 4446).
6) Many meridional ciliary rows (Fig. 8, 17,25,36-39), some bear short, paired cilia and extend left-laterally
from base to top of proboscis (dorsal brush; clearly recognizable only in silver slides or the scanning electron
microscope, not necessary for identification; for details, see Fig. 25,36,41 ,49-51).
1) Oral apparatus huge because composed of proboscis and anterior trunk end. Proboscis, right ventrolateral
trunk flange and circular oral bulge form a conspicuous spiral (genus character!) lined by the circumoral cili-
ary row; proboscis and flange densely ciliated by short, oblique preoral rows on left and two specialized so-
matic ciliary rows accompanying right half of circumoral row (Fig. 1,4,13,25,34,36, 38, 40-48).
8) Swims moderately fast by rotation about main body axis, occasionally swims backward.
Similar species
Easy to identify because very conspicuous due to the long proboscis, the spiral shape, the large oral field, and the
obconical trunk. However, these features are frequently partially or completely lost in insufficiently preserved
(fixed) cells, Ieaving behind an ellipsoidal, unstructured mass (in this case, look for the characteristic macronu-
cleus, but be careful not to confuse it with -+ Linostomella). Paradileptus flagellaras (ROUSSELET, 1890),
which is identical in size and shape, has only 2 macronuclear nodules (-+ taxonomy; Fig. 10). -+ Pelagodileptus
trachelioides has symbiotic green algae and is usually distinctly larger than P. elephantinrzs (300-600 pm vs.
150-350 pm). 2, 3, 5 (no symbiotic algae),7 (circular oral opening) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common but usually not very abundant (but biomass!) in the plankton of lakes,
reservoirs, ponds, and large rivers. Locus classicus of P. elephantinus is a pond (Unterpoöemitzer Teich) in Bo-
hemia, where SVEC ( 1897) discovered it during an algal bloom in July. Locus classicus of both P. conicus and
P. robustus is a pond at the University of Pennsylvania, USA, where WENRICH (1929a) found P. conicus in
mid-May; it reached a maximum on May 2O and was not seen after May 25. Paradileptus robustus was present
in very small numbers in company with a few individuals of P. conicus, which occurred also in Mattson Lake,
San Francisco, USA, from September to November and from January to March. Locus classicts of Tentaculiftra
mexicana is a pond in Bosque de Chapultepec, Mexico City (SOKOLOFF 1931). HUBER-PESTALOZZI (1945)
discovered P. ovalis in the spring plankton of a large lake (Zürichsee) in Switzerland. Locus classicus of P. es-
tensis is the moat of the Castle Estense, Ferrara, northern Italy. DRAGESCO ( 1972b) discovered P . minutus in
the Kasinga Channel, Uganda. Records substantiated by illustrations: eutrophic pond at Salzburg University,
Austria (FOISSNER et al. 1995; Fig. 26-52); abundant (360 ind.l-') in a eutrophic fish pond in Salzburg,
Austria, during early September (our observations); England (CURDS 1982; Fig. 8); pond in France (FRYD-
VERSAVEL etal. 1975); groundwater ponds in Styria, Austria, only during the warm season (KRAINER 1988);
occasionally abundant in the spring plankton of the Alster in Hamburg, Germany (KAHL 1935); moderately dys-
trophic lake in Poland (CZAPIK & FYDA 1995); Lake Baikal area (LOKOT 1987); Lake Ho Hu, Nanking,
China (WANG & NIE 1933,Fi5.24); freshwater of the Upper Peninsula in Michigan, USA (LUNDIN & WEST
1963); Chari River, Chad (DRAGESCO 1972a, DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS 1986); plankton of
Murray River, Australia (our observations).
Records of P. elephantinusnot substantiated by illustrations: eutrophic lake (Piburger See) in Tyrol, Austria, in
0-15 m almost throughout the year with peaks (142 ind.l-t = 241 mg m-3 in the surface layer; 240 ind. 1-r in 3 m;
222ind.lt=2JJ mgm-3 in 3m) during May andJune (SCHLOTT-IDL IgS4,ZIMMERMANN 1989); small
lake (Höllerersee) in Upper Austria (NAUWERCK 1996); Czechoslovakia (SI-Ä»EÖEK 1969, §nÄUBf-
HU§EK 1957); mesotrophic lake (Heiliges Meer) in Germany (MÜCKE 1979); pond in Münster and about
1000 ind. l-r during summer in a eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Bonn, Germany (KRÜGER 1936;
V/ILBERT 1969, who also recorded P. conicus, also mainly during summer); eutrophic lake (Plußsee) in Ger-
222

Gymnostomatea
many only from March to early May with a peak of 208 ind. 1-r in 0-2 m (RECK 1987; she also recorded the
synonym P. conicus during the same time); rare in German running waters (BUCK 1961, HEUSS eI al. 1912);
Azerbaijanian reservoir (ALEKPEROV 1984a, who also recorded the synonym P. conicus); Latvian running wa-
ters (LIEPA 19'73,1983); Ukrainian reservoirs, ponds, and rivers (KRAVCHENKO 1969; NEBRAT 1980,1992,
misspelled P. elefantinus; OLEKSIV 1985, OLEKSIV et al. 1986; in some of their papers, they recorded also the
synonym P . conicus); Volga delta, USSR (KOSOVA 1965); betamesosaprobic reservoir and other reservoirs and
lakes in the USSR (MAMAEVA 1976a; MYLNIKOVA 1992a, 1993, P. conicus also recorded; ZHARIKOV &
ROTAR 1992,ZHUKOV & MAMAEVA 1978; ZHARIKOV 1992: benthic record); water supply reservoirs of
Moscow, Russia (BELOVA 1990); Japan (KUSANO 1985, MATSUOKA et al. 1983); reservoir in Brazil
throughout the year with up to 600 ind.l-r during March-April-May and September-October (BARBIERI &
GODINHO-ORLANDI 1989b); up to 20 ind. l-r at 28' C in Java lakes (RUTTNER 1952).
Records of the synonym P. conicrs not substantiated by illustrations (see also previous paragraph): Danube
River and its sidebranches in Hungary (BERECZKY & NOSEK 1994); Azerbaijanian reservoirs with daily verti-
cal migrations (ALEKPEROV 1980, 1982, 1983, 1988, 1990); Donor water reservoir, USSR (ALEKPEROV
1989); Latvian Lakes (LIYEPA 1984b); Volga River (especially during summer), Ladoga Lake, and mesotrophic
and eutrophic reservoirs and lakes in the USSR (BELOVA 1989, 1994, KORNIYENKO 1912, MAMAEVA
1916b,1919a, b, MYLNIKOYA 1992b, SMIRNOVA 1987); Lake Donghu (in summer, autumn and winter) and
other sites in China (GONG 1986, who also recorded P. robustus in winter; SHEN & GU 1965, SU et al. 1988);
near Mexico Ciry (PEREZ REYES & SALAS GOMEZ 1961); among living and dead macrophyres in the Pan-
tanal,Brazil (HECKMAN 1998, HARDOIM & HECKMAN 1996).
Records of the synonym P. robustus not substantiated by illustrations (see also previous paragraph): Japan
(SUDZUKI 1979; misspelled P. robostus); Michigan, USA (WEST & LUNDIN 1963); South River, Virginia,
USA (RUTHVEN 1972); cypress swamp in the delta plain of the Mississippi River, USA (BAMFORTH 1969).
Records of Paradileptus sp., possibly referring to P. elephantinus,which is, according to the literature and our ex-
perience, much more common than -+ Pelagodileptus trachelioides: mesotrophic Lake Mondsee, Austria (SAL-
BRECHTER & ARNDT 1994); Denmark (HAVE 1993); Lake Constance and a eutrophic lake in Germany
(MÜLLER 1989, MÜLLER et at. 1991, scHwErzEP. 1994, WEISSE & MÜLLER 1990, ZTMMERMANN
1994); etrophic lakes (Windermere, Esthwaite) in England (LAYBOURN-PARRY & ROGERSON 1993, LAY-
BOURN-PARRY et al. 1990); wet mosses from Japan (SUDZUKI 1964) and Venezuela (SCORZA & NÜNEZ
MONTIEL 1954); Lake Oglethorpe and West Long Lake, USA (PACE 1982, PACE & VAQUE 1994, SAND-
ERS et al. 1989); Kenyan lakes (BAMFORTH et al. 1987); Lake Taupo, New Zealand (JAMES et al. 1995).
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria, heterotrophic and autotrophic flagetlates (Chilomonas paramaecium,
Cryptomonas, Leptocinclis), ciliates (-+ Ophrydium versatile), and rotifers such as Polyarthra and Keratella
(Fig. 33; BICK 1912a, FOISSNER et al. 1995, FRYD-VERSAVEL et al. 1915, KRAINER 1988, MAMAYEVA
& KOPYLOV 1978, MÜCKE 1979, SVEC 1897, WENRICH 1929a). Biomass of 106 specimens 1700mg
(SCHLOTT-IDL 1978), about 1000 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1995),136 mg (NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK
l99l), lll mg (NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991; for the synonym, P. conicus). Generation time of
Paradileptus sp. in Lake Constance at 8.5" C about 210 h (MÜLLER 1989). RECK (1987) found P. elephantinus
and P. conicus at following conditions: 3.4-11.3" C (>200ind.l-r at'7-8.4' C), pH 8.4-9.1 (9.1), 5.8 to
19.4 mglt 02 (14.1 mg f '), 44-116 7o Oz-saturation (121 Vo),0.03-0.06 mg 1-r NH+*-N (0.04 mg 1 r). SCHLOTT-
IDL(1984)recorded itat4-20" C(maximumat l6'C),pH6.6-9.0 (1.9),2.8-13.3mgl'Or(9.9 mgll),0.013
to 0.13 mg lr NH+*-N (0.013 mg lr). BELOVA (1989) found high numbers mainly at 19-24" C.
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Eurasia, Africa and Australia, thus very likely cosmopolitan.
Common in the plankton of mesotrophic and eutrophic stagnant and large running waters, numbers usually be-
low 1000 ind. 1-r, but contribution to total heterotrophic biomass often considerable due to the huge size.
Throughout the year, that is, eurythermic but possibly preferring the warm seasons (MAMAEVA 1979a). Oligo-
stenohaline. Omnivorous, feeds also on small metazoans. Resting cyst formation known (Fig. 9a, b). Saprobic
classification according to FOISSNER et al. (1995): betamesosaprobic (o = 3, b = 6, a= l,I = 3, SI = 1.8).
223

Gymnostomatea
E
OF
OB
CV
FV
MA
PR
t
OF
MA
9a
OB
rV
CV
E
Paradileptus elephantinus and its presumed synonyms; see synonymy list fbr details (1, -3,4, äonr KAHL 1935; 2, liom SVEC l89l 5-7,
9b,fromWENRICH 1929a;8, fromCURDS 1982;9a, fromHUBER-PESTALOZZI 1945. l-6,8,9,invivo; T,stainedspecimen). 1,6:
Specimens with obconical trunk, 150 pm, 100-200 pm. Number ofmacronuclear nodules is 6-8 in (1) and 4-8 in (6). 2,3,5,8: Specimens
with ellipsoidal, that is, posteriorly more or less rounded trunk, 200-250 x 100 pm (2),20M.00 pm (3), 180-450 pm, usually 250-350 pm
long (5), ? pm (8). Number of macronuclear nodules is 8-12 in (2),40 in (3), and I 0-20 in (5). 4: Top view of oral basket and proximal por-
tion of oral bulge. 7: Twotailed specimen. 9a, b: Resting cysts, 100-120 pm. Note radially striated outer layer. CV = contractile vacuoles, E
= exffusomes along oral bulge and in periphery of trunk, FV = food vacuole, MA = moniliform macronucleus, OB = oral basket, OF = wide,
cup-shaped oral field, pft = proboscis.
Paradileptus flagellatus in vivo ( I 0, from ROUSSELET I 890) is 390-460 x 210 to 250 pm in size and has only two macronuclear nodules,
which is the sole difference to P. elephantinus.
224

Gymnostomatea
OF
-oB-
MA
CV
MA
üiii'iqr
ß
%d/
Paradileptus elephantinus and its presumed synonyms; see synonylny list and taxonoury section fbr details (ll, 12, f}om
SOKOLOFF 1931;13,15-18, from HUBER-PESTALOZZI 1945;14, from CANELLA 1951. I l, 13-18, in vivo; 12, stain).
ll, 12: Total view and longitudinal optical section of the synonym Tentaculifera mexicana, 100 x 60 pm. 13: Ventral view
of thesynonymParadileptusovalis, 100-160x80pm, l1-l4macronuclearnodules.14, 15, 17,18: Totalviewsof the
synonym P . conicus, 140-190 x 90-1 15 pm, 180-200 pm. The number of macronuclear nodules is 8-10 in ( 14) and 9-13 in
(15, 17,18). 16: Late divider with fused macronuclear nodules and new proboscis (arrow) for posterior daughter. CV = con-
tractile vacuoles, E, = extrusomes in oral bulge and in periphery of trunk, MA = moniliform macronucleus, OB = oral basket,
OF = large, cup-shaped oral field, pR. = proboscis.
225

Gymnostomatea
21
l'aradileptus eleplruntinus and its plesunrcrl synonynrs; sce synonynry list and taxonomy scction lbr details 119-22, front CANELLA
1951;23, from DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS 1986 24, from WANG & NIE 1933; 25, from FRYD-VERSAVEL et al. 1975.
19-24,in vivo;25, protargol impregnation). 19-22:Total views and detalls of Paradileptus estensis, which is possibly a distinct species
because ofthe large size (350-800 pm) and the long, thin proboscis. As usual, the proboscis length is highly variable (Fig. 20), very likely
because it is very fragile and thus often injured or even partially or completely lost. 23: Total view of the synonym Paradileptus minutus,
220-300 pm, whose main characters are the short proboscis (very likely due to injury) and the few (4-5) macronuclear nodules. 24:Yen-
tral view of the synonym P . robustus, 400 x 240 pm, 1G-30 macronuclear nodules. 25: Ciliature of oral region. CO = circumoral ciliary
row, CR I = first specialized somatic ciliary row right of circumoral ciliary row, CV = contractile vacuoles, DB = dorsal brush, E = extru-
p(
somes, MA = moniliform macronucleus, OB = oral basket, OE = oral bulge, OF = depressed oral field, = preoral ciliary rows.
226

Gymnostomatea
#
W
,i*'
2V 28
ß1 3S
,CH:1" cR'2
Paradileptuselephantinus (26-35,tionrFOISSNERetal. l995andoriginalsof samepopulationtl'ourtl.reeutroplricpondatSalzburgUni-
versity, Austria. 26-30,33, in vivo bright field micrographs; 31, preserved specimen; 32, in vivo interference contrast micrograph; 34, 35,
protargol impregnation). 26-30: Various views of a single, freshly collected specimen showing the characteristic, obconical trunk and the
spiralled proboscis. Arrows mark contractile vacuoles. 31, 32: The macronucleus is moniliform with a highly variable number (7-20) of
nodules. Paradileptus elephantinus is very delicate and rounds up even when fixed with osmium acid, forming the common elephantinus
habitus (+ taxonomy). 33: Squashed specimen with an ingested Keratella.34, 35: Ciliary pattem of right side of proboscis and resting and
released extrusomes in oral bulge. CO = circumoral ciliary row, CRl,2 = specialized somatic ciliary rows right of circumoral ciliary row
(for details, seeFig.4446), E = extrusomes in oral bulge, MA = macronucleus.
227

Gymnostomatea
39
Paradileptus elephantinus (36-39, original scanning electron micrographs of a population fiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University,
Austria). 36-39: Total views showing the characteristic, obconical shape of the trunk; the large, cup-shaped oral field with the circular oral
bulge (arrowhead in 36); and the long, spiralled proboscis. The proboscis and the large oral field make swimming cells very conspicuous.
Arrows in (36) mark excretory pore of contractile vacuoles. Paradileptus has, as genus character, two specialized somatic ciliary rows (ar-
rows in 39) right ofthe circumoral ciliary row (cp. Fig. 34,44,46 ard Fig. 3lby -+ Pelagodileptus trachelioides). DB = dorsal brush, OE =
oral bulge, OF = oral field, PK a QQ = preoral ciliary rows and circumoral ciliary row, pf, = proboscis.
228

Gymnostomatea
ÜE
40 4t
Paradileptus elephantinus i40-43, original scanning electron micrographs ofa population tiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University,
Austria). 4043: Paraditeptus elephantinus has many aspects (cp. Fig. 36-39) due to the conical body shape and the spiralized proboscis,
which winds around the large, depressed oral field and continuous to the oral opening, which is surrounded by a conspicuous bulge (arrow in
43). The proboscis is covered by a dense ciliature showing beautiful metachronal waves (arrowheads in 43). These characters, which are
easytorecognizeinlivespecimens,sepztrate P.elephantinusunequivocaJlyfrom-+ Pelagodileptustrachelioides' Arrowsin (40,41)mark
some of the many excretory pores of the conffactile vacuoles, which are in the periphery of the trunk and the dorsal side of the proboscis. DB
= dorsal brush, OE = oral bulge, PK = preoral ciliary rows, PR - proboicis.
229

Gymnostomatea
#H2
4fr
Paradileptus elephantinus loriginals frorn pond at Salzbulg Univelsity; protargol impregtration). 44-46: Dorsolateral arr6 velttrolatelal
views of the somatic and oral ciliary pattern. Right of the circumoral ciliary row (arrowhead in 44) are two specialized somatic rows (arrows
in44,CRl,2 in 46), which are composed of narrowly spaced cilia. At the left side of the pröboscis are many oblique preoral ciliary rows
(46), which produce nice metachronal waves (Fig.43). CO = circumoral ciliary row, CRl,2 = specialized somatic ciliary rows right of cir-
cumoralciliaryrow,E=extrusomes,MA=macronucleus,Ml=micronucleus,OB=oralbasket,OF=oralfield,PK=preoralkineties.
230

Gymnostomatea
to+PK
47
Paradileptus elephantinus (47-52, originals of a population fiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria. 47, 49-52, scanning
electron micrographs; 48, protargol impregnation). 47, 48: Frontal views showing the large, cup-shaped oral field surrounded by the spirally
extending proboscis (anterior portion lost by preparation), which bears many short, oblique preoral ciliary rows on the left side. The proxi-
mal end of the oral bulge is, like the oral basket, circular; this is an important difference to --> Pelagodileptus trachelioides, which has an ob-
long oral basket. 49-51: The dorsal brush, which extends from the base to the top of the proboscis, is composed of several rows of short,
paired iilia of unequal length. 52: Paradileptus elephantinus has many contractile vacuoles, each with a single excretory pore (arrows). CO
= circumoral ciliary row, DB = dorsal brush, E = extrusomes, OF = wide, cup-shaped oral field, pK = preoral ciliary rows'
23r

Gymnostomatea
Pelagodileptus nov. gen.
D i ag n o s i s: Tracheliidae withflat, unspiralized oral areacontaining oblong oral opening and oral funnel
composed of an inner and outer basket of nematodesmata. With dikinetidal circumoral ciliary row accompanied
by many oblique, short preoral ciliary rows on left and two specialized somatic ciliary rows on right.
Type speci es: Dileptustrachelioides ZACHARIAS, 1894.
Etymo I ogy: Compositeof theGreek nounpelägios (livinginthe open ssa=planktonic) and Dileptus,indi-
cating relationship with dileptids.
Comparison with related genera:
ZACHARIAS(1894)establishedthepresentspecieswithin
Dileptus DUJARDIN because of the dileptid habitus. AWERINZEW (1908) transferred it to Amphileptus
EHRENBERG because of the oblong oral basket. However, the redescriptions of the synonym Paradileptus ca-
ducus by FRYD-VERSAVEL et al. (1915; Fig. 32) and PACKROFF & WILBERT (1991; Fig. 3l) confirm
ZACHARIAS. We establish a new genus for this species, although its oral infraciliature is as in -+ Paradileptus,
because it lacks the spirally wounded oral field, which is so prominent in -+ Paradileptus. See FOISSNER
(1991) and Figures on next page for details on other genera.
P e lagodile ptus trachelioide s qrcuARIAS, I 8e4) nov. comb.
1894 Dileptus trachelioides ZACHARIAS, ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 2: 78.
1927 Dileptus tachelioides ZACHARIAS - HUBER & NIPKOW, Vjschr. naturf. Ges. Zürich, 12:312 (mor-
phology and division from life; ecology).
1930 Amphileptus (Dileptus) tachelioides (ZACH.l893) - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl.,21: 182 (revision).
*
1933 Amphileptus tachelioides ZACHARIAS GAJEWSKAJA, Zoologica, Stuttg., 32: 58 (morphology).
1935 Paradileptus (? ) caducus KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 823 (new synonym; poorly described).
1966 Paradileptus caducus KAHL - DRAGESCO, Arch. Protistenk., 109: 181 (redescription from life).
1966 Paradileptus canellai DRAGESCO, Protistolo gica,2:77 (new synonym).
1975 Paradileptus caducas KAHL 1935 - FRYD-VERSAVEL, IFTODE & DRAGESCO, Protistologica, 11:
520 (oral ciliature after silver impregnation).
1991 Paradileptus caducus KAHL, 1935 - PACKROFF & WILBERT, Arch. Protistenk., 140: 125 (authorita-
tive redescription from life and after silver impregnation).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
Sometimes misspelled Amphileptus tracheloides. Paradileptus caducus and P. canellai are junior synonyms of
Dileptus trachelioides because they agree in habitat (pelagial), size, nuclear apparatus, and symbiotic green
algae; they are, however, much more slender, indicating that they are ecoforms. The number of macronuclear
nodules, used by DRAGESCO (1966, 1966a) for species distinction, is highly variable. Dileptus saaleri
SCHWARZ, 1962 (Fig. 7), another planktonic dileptid, is very likely a further synonym of P. tachelioides. The
second proboscis near mid-body indicates that SCHWARZ observed a divider (cp. Figure 13 and HUBER &
NIPKOW 1921).He did not mention zoochlorellae, possibly because only preserved specimens were studied.
Differenl ial iagnosis
d
1) Size in vivo 230-800 x 100-300 pm, usually 300-600 pm long; proboscis up to trunk length.
2) Body club-shaped, that is, trunk broadly to slenderly fusiform with pointed posterior end and short to long
motile proboscis (Fig. l, 4, 10, 15, 11 ,23,24,28-30); distorted specimens often broadly ellipsoidal and with
shortened proboscis (Fig. 5, 8a,9,12,19,20).
232

Gymnostomatea
3) Macronucleus in longitudinal axis of trunk, moniliform, composed of 6-27, usually 10-20 globular nodules
(Fig. 1, 2, 6-12, 17, 24, 27 -28).
4) Many contractile vacuoles, difficult to recognize due to the strongly vacuolized cytoplasm, in dorsal side of
proboscis and periphery of trunk (Fig.24,28).
s) Cells usually green due to innumerable zoochlorellae 24 pm across and accumulated in posterior trunk region
(Fig. 1, 12, 17 ,28, own observ.). Cytoplasm very viscous and strongly vacuolized. Two types of rod-shaped
(about 2 trrm and 6 pm long) exffusomes, mainly in oral bulge of proboscis (Fig. 3, 8b, c, 9,14,28).
6) About l2O-200 meridional ciliary rows. Several rows of paired, short cilia extend left-laterally from base to
top of proboscis (dorsal brush; silver impregnation; not necessary for identification; Fig. | , 3, 3l , 32).
7) Oral apparatus large because extending from anterior trunk end to top ofproboscis, lined by circumoral cili-
ary row; oral basket large and oblong. Proboscis densely ciliated by short, oblique preoral rows on left and
twospecializedsomaticciliaryrowsclosetorighthalf of circumoralrow(Fig. 1,3,11,17,23-26,31,32).
8) Swims slowly to moderately fast up and down, performing circular and dangling movements with the probos-
cis.
o a
e l,
a
oa Il illi o aa illllrr
lll
a
a o
D ilcptusl Rintu lcptrts M otrilit'ar)-0n D itttuct'ocut')'ott Pclugotlileptus Purutlilcptus
Distinction of tracheliid genera (original) by the oral basket (absent only in Dimacrocaryon), the spiral oral field (present only in Paradi-
leptus), and the oral ciliature (oblique preoral ciliary rows lacking in Monilicaryon; two specialized somatic ciliary rows right of circumoral
ciliary row in Pelagodileptus and Paradileptus). CO = circumoral ciliary row, CR = specialized somatic ciliary row(s), OB = oral basket, PK
= preoral ciliary rows.
233

Gymnostomatea
Similar species
-+ Paradileptus elephantinus and P . Jlagellatus (ROUSSELET, 1S90) WENRICH, I 929 (two macronuclear nod-
ules; Fig. l0 by P. elephantinus) lack symbiotic green algae, are stouter and smaller (150-350pm vs.
300-600 pm), and have a large, spiral oral field with a circular, distinct oral basket. Monilicaryon monilatus
(STOKES, 1886b) JANKOWSKI, 1961 , which has a similar size and shape as Pelagodileptus trachelioides, is
usually benthic, lacks symbiotic green algae, and has a circular oral basket (detailed description in FOISSNER
l99l and FOISSNER et al. 1995). Trachelius ovum (EHRENBERG, 1831) EHRENBERG, 1838, which looks
like a bulky P. trachelioides, also lacks symbiotic green algae and has a dumb-bell shaped macronucleus and a
circular oral basket (detailed description in FOISSNER 1997 and FOISSNER et al. 1995). 2,3, 5 (symbiotic
green algae),7 (oral basket oblong) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic and throughout the year with a spring peak in lakes, reservoirs,
ponds and large rivers; not as common as -) Paradileptus elephantinus. Locus classicus of Pelagodileptus trache-
lioides is a large lake (Großer Plöner See) in northern Germany (ZACHARIAS 1894, l894a,l90oa). The maxi-
mum abundance was 20 ind. cm2 during May (ZACHARIAS 1896). Later, ZACHARIAS (1900a, 1902) found P.
trachelioides in many other lakes near Plön. Locus classicus of the synonym Paradileptus caducus is a very
slowly running water (Alster) in Hamburg, northem Germany, where KAHL (1935) discovered a dozen speci-
mens. The locus classicus of Dileptus saaleri is also in northem Germany, where SCHW ARZ (1962) discovered it
in brackish lakes (2.44.9 Voo salt) near the Baltic Sea with a peak (31 1 ind. l-r) during summer. Locus classicus of
Paradileptus canellai is Lake Geneva, where DRAGESCO (1966) found numerous specimens in August.,
Records substantiated by illustrations: spring plankton of a large lake (Zürichsee) in Switzerland (HUBER & NIP-
KOW 1921); summer and winter plankton of Lake Baikal but also very abundant from winter to spring and from
summer to autumn (GAJEWSKAJA 1933, see this paper for further, old Russian records; EGGERT 1968, KAP-
LIN 1969); Danish lakes (WESENBERG-LUND 1952); very abundant in a drinking water reservoir in Bohemia
during late May (SLÄDEÖEK 1964); fresh waters near Paris, France (DRAGESCO 1966a): pond in France dur-
ing October and January (FRYD-VERSAVEL et al. l9l5); eu- to polytrophic lake in Germany during winter and
spring (PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991); up to 52 ind.l-r (1 m, early March) and'76 ind. lr (3 m, early June) in
groundwater ponds of Styria, disappeared during summer (KRAINER 1988); very rare in a small lake (Grabensee)
near Salzburg (our observation).
Records not substantiated by illustrations: lakes in Carinthia, Austria, mainly during May (FINDENEGG 1943,
1953); Danube River in Hungary (BERECZKY & NOSEK 1995); occasionally abundant in an oligotrophic lake
(Erdfallsee) in Germany (EHLERS 1965); slightly eutrophic drinking water reservoir (Saidenbach-Talsperre) in
Germany peaking during May (BEUSCHOLD 1961); mesotrophic lake (Pfäffikersee) in Switzerland mainly dur-
ing spring and autumn (MESSIKOMMER 1952, 1954); Swedish lakes (PEJLER 1964); brackish lake in Yugo-
slavia (PETKOVIÖ & PETKOVIÖ 1978); Azerbaijanian reservoir (ALEKPEROV 1984a); Lielupe River and
lakes in Latvia (LIEPA l9l3,LIYEPA 1984a, b); Onega Lake and Ladoga Lake, Russia (KUSTOVLYANKINA
1990, SMIRNOVA 1987); reservoir near Moscow, Russia, subdominant during summer (BELOVA 1994);
mesosaprobic reservoirs in the USSR (MAMAEVA 1914a,1916a, b, ZHUKOV & MAMAEVA 1978); Volga
River, Russia (MAMAEVA 1979, 1919b); diverse sites in the USSR, including a cooler basin of a power station
(ARSLANOVA 1980, AVERINTZEV 1899, TIMOFEEVA 1989); up to 235 ind.l-r (surface) and 2ind.l-l
(92m) in Cayuga Lake, New York, USA, during late June (HUNT & CHEIN 1983).
Autecological data: Feeds on Oscillatoria rubescens, O.limosa, dinoflagellates, Pandorina morum, and plank-
tonic rotifers, such as Keratella aculeata, K. cochlearis and Synchaeta sp. (Fig. 30; FRYD-VERSAVEL et al.
1975, HUBER & NIPKOW 1921, PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991, SCHWAP.Z 1962). Biomass of 106 speci-
mens about 4500 mg (trunk size about 400 x 150 pm). Temperature limit in Carinthian lakes 6.6-14.6" C (FIN-
DENEGG 1943). HUBER & NIPKOW (1927) found highest numbers at 8-l5o C, and GAJEWSKAJA (1933)
234

Gymnostomatea
observed P. trachelioides at0-22.2"C, pH1.2J.9,6.4-13.5 mglr Oz,0-3.3mgl-r COz. In a nutrient enrich-
ment experiment, P. trachelioides occurred only during the initial period (LIYEPA 1984a).
Resting cysts in life 120-180 pm across, macronuclear nodules fused to one up to 60 pm-sized, globular mass
(Fig. 21,22; HUBER & NIPKOW 1921 , ZACHARIAS 1894); transported from the sediment to the surface dur-
ing spring circulation (HUBER & NIPKOW 1921).
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Europe and Asia only. Euplanktonic, not very common but highly
conspicuous due to the huge size and green colour. Throughout the year (eurythermic), usually peaking during
spring and early summer. Oligo-euryhaline. Mixotrophic, that is, can sustain periods of low food supply by using
its symbiotic green algae, which are, however, lacking sometimes (KRAINER 1988, HUBER & NIPKOW
1927). Resting cyst formation known. Possibly prefers oligotrophic and mesotrophic conditions. Saprobic classi-
fication according to FOISSNER (1988a): oligosaprobic (o = 7, b = 3, I = 4, SI = 1.3).
I
CR
OB
Pelagodileptus trachelioides (l-6, the synonym Purutlilcptus tctncllui ll'orn DRAGESCO 1966;7, the synonym Dilcpiils suulcri from
SCHWARZ 1962;8a, from WESENBERG-LUND 1952;8b, c, originals. 1,3-5,1,8a-c, in vivo; 2,6, Feulgen stain). 1,4,5: Total views,
600 p m on average. Note different length of proboscis. 2, 6: The nuclear apparatus of the synonym P . canellai consists of I l-22 macronu-
clear nodules, each about l0;rm across, and,6-25 micronuclei about 3 pm in diameter. 3: Oral apparatus. 7: Ventral view, 300 x 75 pm.
SCHWARZ misinterpreted the new proboscis (arrow) of a middle divider as species character (cp. Fig. l3 and HUBER & NIPKOW 1927).
8a: Right lateral view of a squashed specimen. 8b, c: Short (2 pm) and tong (6 pm) extrusomes. CR = somatic ciliary rows, E = extrusomes,
MA = macronucleus, MI = moniliform micronucleus, OB = oral basket rods (nematodesmata), SA = symbiotic green algae.
235

Gymnostomatea
-MA
A_
,\ /,
7);
14
Pelagodileptus trachelioides in vivo (9-14,21, from ZACHARIAS 1894; 15, 18,
from GAJEWSKAJA 1933; 16, lJ, 19,22, from HUBER & NIPKOW 1927;20,
from SLÄDEÖnf 1964). 9-12: Total views of bulky specimens (230-210 x
I 80-200 pm; 6-14 macronuclear nodules) looking very much ltke Trachelius oyunt
(no zoochlorellae, single macronucleus). 13: Middle divider with a new proboscis
(ar:row) for the posterior daughter.14: Rod-shaped extrusomes, 10 pm long. 15, 18:
Normal cell and specimen with lost proboscis from Lake Baikal, length usually
35H00 pm, rarely up to 800'pm. 16, 17r 19: Just excysted specimen, with inconspicuous proboscis, fiom spring plankton (16); dileptid
specimen (17); and tracheliform specimen (19); 100-600 x 100-300 pm, on average 300 pm long. 20: Slender specimen from a Bohemian
reservoir, extended specimens >700 x 130 pm, distorted (contracted according to SLÄDEÖEK) cells 500*610 x 130-230 pm. 21,22: Resr
ing cysts, 160-180 pm, 120-160 pm. Note that the macronuclear nodules fused to a globular mass (21). E = extrusomes, MA = macronu-
cleus, OA = oral apparatus with extrusomes, SA = symbiotic green algae (according to all authors accumulated in posterior portion ofcell),
VA = strongly vacuolized cytoplasm.
236

Gymnostomatea
ffi
ä#ffi
W,
R
OA
Jl
r,]
,,
lt,
.-P
K
/,
CR 1
,/
CO-... CO
=___NO
32
31
pelagodileptus yachelioides (23-32, the synonym Puratlileptus tutlut'tts.23-2't , ftom DRAGESCO 1966a; 28, 30, 3 I , tiom PACKROFF &
WILBERT lggl; 2g, from KAHL 1935; 32, from FRYD-VERSAVEL et al. 1975. 23-25,28-30, in vivo; 26, 27, iron-hematoxylin and
Feulgen stain; 31, 32,prot6golimpregnation). 23,24:Total views,400-800 pm.25,26: Ventral and lateral view ofoblong oral basket' 27:
The nuclear apparatus is composed of 6-12 macronuclear nodules, 13-26 pm across, containing large nucleoli. 28-30: Total views, 340-700
x g&-150 pm (28, 30), 500-800 pm (29). 31, 32: Ciliature of oral region. CO = circumoral ciliary row, CRl,2 = specialised somatic ciliary
rows, an important diagnostic feature of the genus, CV = contractile vacuoles, DB = dorsal brush, E = extrusomes (3 pm), MA = moniliform
macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, N = nematodesmata and fibres forming an inner (NI) and outer (No) oral basket, NU = nucleoli, oA =
oral apparatus, OE = oral bulge, p( = preoral ciliary rows, SA = symbiotic green algae'
231

Gymnostomatea
Teuthophrys trisulca subspecies trisulcc cHArroN & DE BEAUCHAMe, ts23 nov. stat.
and Teuthophrys trisulca subspecie s africana DRAGESCo & DRAGESCo-rBnNBrs, rqao
nov. stat.
1923 Teuthophrys tisulca CHATTON & DE BEAUCHAMP, Archs Zool. exp. gdn., 6l:123.
1924 Teuthophrys trisulca CHATT. et DE BEAUCH. - CHATTON & DE BEAUCHAMP, Bull. Ass. philo-
math. Als. Lorr., 6: 285 (establishment of family Teuthophryidae).
*
1929 Teuthophrys trisulca CHATTON and DE BEAUCHAMP,1923 WENRICH, Trans. Am. microsc. Soc.,
48:221 (detailed redescription from life and biology).
1929 Triloba paradoxa MUDREZOWA-WYSS, Arch. Protistenk., 68: 422 (synonym; with zoochlorellae).
l93O Teuthophrys trisulca CH. u. B. - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 176 (revision).
1967 Teutophrys trisulca (CHATTON, DE BEAUCHAMP) - CLEMENT-IFTODE &. VERSAVEL, Protisto-
logica, 3: 457 (redescription from life and after silver impregnation, ecology).
1972 Teutophrys trisulca CHATTON et DE BEAUCHAMP - DRAGESCO, Annls Fac. Sci. Univ. f6d Camer-
oun, 9: 92 (description of apochlorotic form).
1986 Teutophrys trisulca CHATTON et DE BEAUCHAMP, 1923 - DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS,
Faune tropicale,26: 166 (short monograph).
1986 Teutophrys africanus DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS, Faune tropicale, 26 16l (established for
the apochlorotic form described by DRAGESCO l9l2b and listed above).
Nomenclature and t a xonomy
Often incorrectly spelled Teutophrys (for example, CORLISS 196l,p. 126, and list of synonyms). Teuthophrys
is feminine gender, thus "africanus" has to be corrected: Teuthophrys africana nom. corr. Teuthophrys belongs,
according to our investigations, to the Spathidiida FOISSNER & FOISSNER, 1988. The infraciliature and extru-
some apparatus are highly reminiscent of Spathidium. Previous authors (CORLISS 1919, CLEMENT-IFTODE
& VERSAVEL 1961) assigned Teuthophrys to the Dileptina, which, however, have a different infraciliature
(FOISSNER 1997). We agree with CHATTON & DE BEAUCHAMP (1924) thatTeuthophrys needs a family of
its own, not because of the lack of a mouth opening, as erroneously assumed by the discoverers, but due to its
unique, trilobate body organization.
Most Teuthophrys poptlations have symbiotic green algae (CHATTON & DE BEAUCHAMP 1923, CLf,-
MENT-IF-IODE & VERSAVEL 1967, MUDREZOWA-WYSS 1929, WENRICH 1929). A Ugandan population
(DRAGESCO 1912b; Fig. 15b) and our population (Fig. 16-55), which we found in a floodplain soil from Aus-
tralia, lack zoochlorellae. The chlorotic strains maintain the symbionts in the resting cysts (Fig. 8;
MUDREZOWA-WYSS 1929, WENRICH 1929). Thus, the lack of chlorellae in the above mentioned popula-
tions is very likely not facultative but permanent. Accordingly, we divide 7. trisulca into an apochlorotic subspe-
cies7. trisulcaafricana (Fig. 15-55)andazoochlorellae-bearingT.tisulcatrisulca (Fig. 1-14,56-68).How-
ever, the apochlorotic population described by DRAGESCO (1912b) has a rather short, almost dumb-bell shaped
macronucleus (Fig. 15b), whereas it is rope-like or moniliform in our population (Fig. l5a, 26) and T . trisulca
trisulca (Fig. 7, IO, 12,61). Possibly, the DRAGESCO population is in fact a distinct species (7. africana), and
only our population is an apochlorotic subspecies of I. trisulca. But at the present state of knowledge, we prefer
to split Teuthophrys into only two taxa, inasmuch as DRAGESCO's data are not very detailed.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 150-300 x 50-150 pm, usually around 200 pm long.
2) Body campanulate, that is, the obconical, blunt trunk elongates anteriorly into three equidistant, contractile
oral lobes (proboscides), which spirally curve and widely extend in freely motile, undisturbed specimens
(Fig. 15a; all other Figures show at least slightly disturbed specimens, Fig. 1, 2, 6,7 , 10-12, 15b-18, 2V22,
56,51 ,60). Body shape highly fragile, that is, not only oral lobes become more or less contracted in disturbed
238

Gymnostomatea
specimens, but the campanulate trunk (Fig. 15a) also changes, that is, becomes bursiform (Fig. Fig. 2, 1 , 12,
l5b, 18, 21 , 56). Specimens with contracted oral lobes and bursiform trunk difficult to recognize as Teutho-
phrys (Fig.4,l9).
3) Macronucleus in mid-trunk, tortuous and slightly moniliform, (Fig. 5, 1, 10, 12,26, 61), in African popula-
tion dumb-bell shaped (see taxonomy, Fig. l5b).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end with several excretory pores (Fig. 1,1,10, 15b, 60).
5) Cells of subspecies trisulca green due to numerous symbiotic algae 4-6 pm across (Fig. l, 5,1,10, 12,56,
51,60,61,68); subspecies africana without symbiotic algae (Fig. 15, 18, 23). Many rod-shaped, about
6 x 0.8 pm-sized extrusomes mainly in oral bulge (Fig. 5,7,9,25,28,33,35, 48, 64). Cortex very flexible,
contains narrowly spaced rows of ellipsoidal, minute (0.5 x 0.3 pm) granules (Fig.23,24,30).
6) About 180 meridional ciliary rows. One lobe has short, paired cilia within three specialized ciliary rows,
which extend from the top to near posterior body end (dorsal brush; clearly recognizable only after silver im-
pregnationandinthescanningelectronmicroscope;Fig. 1,7,13,20*22,32,3540,46-55,65,66).
7) Oral apparatus huge due to the three conspicuous proboscides (oral lobes), which originate from an
unciliated, rather large, triangular oral field in the anterior trunk centre, where is an inconspicuous, conical
oral basket, which opens widely during food uptake (Fig. 43, 63). Oral field and oral lobes lined by an incon-
spicuous circumoral ciliary row (Fig. l, 5-1,13,20,33-35,4145,49,58,62,68).
8) Swims rather slowly with widely extended "arms" (Fig. l5a); occasional or frequent reversals of direction
produce short backward excursions. As it swims forward, it rotates clockwise about main body axis while the
proboscides are curved counterclockwise.
Similar species
Unmistakable due to the curious, trilobate body organization. Thus 2 is the key character for identification. For
subspecies separation, character 5 (symbiotic green algae present lT. trisulca trisulca) or absent fT. trisulca afri-
cana)) must be checked.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: A rare, euplanktonic species possibly preferring spring and oligotrophic to meso-
trophic conditions. The locus classicus of Teuthophrys trisulca trisulca is in the Vosges Mountains, where
CHATTON & DE BEAUCHAMP (1923) discovered it in a lake near the top (about 1000 m) of the Hohneck
mountain during late June. The locus classicus of the synonym Triloba paradoxa is near the village of Rublewo,
where MUDREZOWA-WYSS (1929) discovered it in an ox-bow-lake of the Moscow River under 90 cm thick
ice during March. DRAGESCO (1972b) discovered the apochlorotic population (7. africana, Fig. 15b) in a pool
at rhe shore of Lake George, Uganda. CLEMENT-IFTODE & FRYD-VERSAVEL (1967) found abour
100 ind. lr in a pond of Sologne, Central France, during September. WENRICH (1929) and WANG (1928)
counted up to 400 ind. l-r in a pond at the University of Pennsylvania during May, and WENRICH (1929) ob-
served T. trisulca trisulca also in a pond in Golden Gate Park, San Francisco, USA, during September.
Further records: with low abundance in a eutrophic, alpine lake (Piburger See) in Austria (SCHLOTT-IDL
1984); Danish lakes (WESENBERG-LUND 1952); sparse in a eutrophic lake (Plußsee) in Germany from March
to June (RECK 1987); waters in Ferrara, northem Italy, during September (CANELLA 1954); dystrophic pond
in Poland (CZAPIK & FYDA 1995); small, brackish Sasko lake, Yugoslavia (PETKOVIÖ & PETKOVIÖ tSlZ);
Ukrainian reservoirs and ponds (NEBRAT 1980, OLEKSIV 1985, 1985a); Volga River (MAMAEVA 1979,
1919b); Lake Onega, Russia (KUSTOVLYANKINA 1990); freshwaters in Lanzhou, including Yellow River,
China (MA 1994, WANG 1994); Western Long Lake, USA (PACE & VAQUE 1994); South Africa and Austra-
lia (pers. comm. of CALMAN and ROUSSELET to CHATTON & DE BEAUCHAMP 1924;' see also WEN-
RICH 1929, p.222). Teuthophrys trisulca has also been recorded from aquaria (reviewed by GÜNKEL 1997; in-
correctly spelled T. trisulcata).
239

Gymnostomatea
Teuthophrys trisulca has been found several times in soil. CALMAN (see above) observed it in water seeded
with soil received from Hermannsburg, Central Australia, and C. F. ROUSSELET found it in water in which he
had placed dried dust from the state of Victoria, Australia. Unfortunately, it is unknown whether these popula-
tions contained zoochlorellae. Our apochlorotic population (Fig. 16-55) developed in a soilflitter sample from
the floodplain of the Murray River near Albury, Australia (see photograph below). The sample contained almost
80 species, of which about 20 were typical inhabitants of permanent and astatic water bodies; the others were ter-
riphilous forms. FRYD-VERSAVEL (pers. comm.) found an apochlorotic population, possibly a new species, in
rewetted mud from a temporary pool in Africa. We thus do not consider Teuthophrys trisulca to be a soil ciliate;
rather it is a euplanktonic species, whose resting cysts occasionally excyst in rewetted mud/soil samples from
temporarily fl ooded habitats.
Our apochlorotic population.occurletl in a rewettcd soil sanrple, which was taken by H. BLATTE,RER (Linz, Austlia; photoglaph) and R.
SHIEL (Australia) in the Muray River floodplain at the Landside of Ryans road on 2. 8. 1997, during a post-congress workshop organized
by D. J. PATTERSON. The sample was a mixture of leaf litter (mainly from red gum trees and &ied, Myriophyllum) ond light brown, loamy
soil, pH 5.2. It contained a rich (about 80 species) mixture of limnetic and euedaphic ciliate species.
Autecological data: Feeds mainly on rotifers, such as Polyarthra platyptera and Keratella cochlearis macracan-
tha (CHATTON & DE BEAUCHAMP 1923, CLEMENT-IFTODE & VERSAVEL 1967, WENRICH 1929).In-
gestion of rotifers takes only about 1 min (WENRICH 1929). We could cultivate T. trisulca africana in Eau de
Volvic (French table water) with Tetrahymena mobilis as food organism. The cultures thrive well, if some pieces
of meal worrn are added. Biomass of 106 specimens about 1000 mg (our calculations). CLEMENT-IFTODE &
VERSAVEL (1967) found 7. trisulca trisulca at 6.7 mg f r 02, 9.8 mg lr KMnO4-consumption, 4.2 mg 1-r organic
nitrogen, 0.1 mg l-' P,o,n,. RECK (1987) found it at5.2-8.1'C, pH 8.41, '7.3-10.2 mg l-r Oz (63-80 7o saturation).
Ecological summary: Cosmopolitan because reliably recorded from Europe, Asia, North America, Africa, and
Australia. More rare than common in the plankton of stagnant and large running waters. Resting cyst formation
known, thus also in astatic waters, such as floodplains and small ponds. Throughout the year, however, spring
probably preferred. Predacious, that is, feeds mainly on other animals, preferably pelagic rotifers. The symbiotic
green algae in the subspecies trisulca indicate that it can sustain periods of low food supply by using the algae
and/or their metabolites. Probably prefers oligotrophic and/or mesotrophic waters, although several records from
eutrophic habitats indicate that it car at least tolerate such conditions.
240

Gymnostomatea
tsi.{
bj,,,
)
o
L.
MA
SA
-!!r, )9 a-
Teuthophrys trisulca trisulca in vivo (l-4,6, fiorn CHATTON &
oo DE BEAUCHAMP 1923; 5 , J -9 , from WENRICH I 929). l, 2, 7 :
Specimens with more or less extended oral lobes (proboscides),
250-300 prm, 150-300 x 50-150 pm. 3: Middle divider showing
the new oral lobes of the posterior daughter slightly below the di-
SA vision furrow. 4: Specimen with contracted oral lobes. 5: Longitu-
dinal section showing extrusomes in oral bulge, oretl basket rods,
MA macronucleus, zlnd zoochlorellae mainly in periphery of cell. 6:
Frontal view showing the trimerous symmetry of the counterclock-
wise curved oral lobes. 8: Resting cyst. 135-190 pm (outer diame-
ter), 105-ll5 prn (inner diameter; cp. Fi5.27,29).9: Cross sec-
tion near base of an oral lobe showing the extrusome-armed oral
bulge and some zoochlorellae. C = cilia, CV = contractile vacuole,
E = extrusomes, MA = macronucleus, N = fleffiatodesmata (oral
basket ords), OO = oral opening, PR = orerl lobes (proboscides),
SA = symbiotic green algae.
241

Gymnostomatea
,;
O
"L§'
MA
SA
CV
)jil
-..I
.*.o, f ::"t''
,_ a.:: Jgr
I :.
...' t. t: a.. . ,. ,,t a
ttaa ta
aat ttal1a
tta. t tI,i .rtQ
.tt.. a.!t.
o t.',
ot
I
15b
Teuthophrys trisulca trisulca ( 10, 13, 14, from CLEMENT-IFTODE & VERSAVEL 1961 11, 12, the synonym Triloba puradoxa from
MUDREZOWA-WYSS 1929. 10, Feulgen stain; 11, in vivo; 12, carmine stain; 13, 14, silver impregnation). 10, 12: Specimens with par-
tially extended oral lobes showing main organelles, 150-300x 100-150pm, 110-210x90-120pm. 1l: Frontal view of a specimen with
crossed, counterclockwise curved oral lobes. 13: Frontal view of oral and somatic ciliary pattern. 14: Detail of oral lobe ciliature. CO =
circumoral ciliary row, CR = somatic ciliary rows, CV = contractile vacuole, DB = dorsal brush, E = extrusomes, MA = macronucleus, OO =
oral opening, PR = oral lobes (proboscides), SA = symbiotic green algae.
Teuthophrys trisulca africana differs from L trisulca trisulca only in that it lacks symbiotic green algae (15a, original; 15b, from
DRAGESCO 1972b. 15a, b, in vivo). 15a: Typical shape of a freely motile specimen from Australian floodplain population. 15b: African
population with short macronucleus (see taxonomy), ? pm.
242



Gymnostomatea
Teuthophrys trisulca africana (originals tiom Australian floodplain population. 23-25, 27 ,29, in vivo; 26, methyl green-pyronin stain; 28,
30, silver carbonate impregnation). 23r24r30: The cortex is conspicuously thick (2 pm; arrowheads in23) and contains innumerable, bright
granules (0.5 x0.3 pm; Fig. 24),which stain with silver carbonate (30). 25,28: The inner side (oral bulge) of the oral lobes contains many
slightly fusiform extrusomes, which have a size of 6 x 0.8 pm and stain with silver carbonate. 26: The macronucleus is long and indistinctly
moniliform. 27r 29:. T\e globular resting cysts (with mucous layer: 120-150 pm, mean = 139 pm, n = 5; without mucous layer: 95-140 pm,
mean = 112 pm, n = 11; cp. Fig. 8) have a fragile mucous layer (27), which is usually lost when the cysts are removed from the bottom of the
culture dish (29). The cyst membrane (arrowheads in 29) is 2-3 pm thick, smooth, and yellowish. E = extrusomes, MA = macronucleus.
244

Gymnostomatea
:i*t$
"':ffi,,,
'"'ffi@affi.ffi"
:/f.f"ii.(!f;'f.1i.:t:t:t/i,,: :,.(...i
.NiM
,W
**
{:,:t. : ;#ifi *.
,
..{!l
'W* W W,,. ,'* o ,'* ,' :,i {:r ii*
-ffi'
',{;{$W,,f
.,{'
{
,,. ä
Si1r
Ärk
'"r' w, "';,
ffi;",7;"TÄ,',1',.,,*,,r^r,,,,:'i1rl,*'i':::,::""?Till,t"JJi#:"1L#;ill:Ii?liTffi:li]:il,ff'i,l;il','."J:äiiä::
row 34: ciriarv pattern at top or an orar robe 35'
T 3 (a6 sl : tÄ eS ra i' smJ k)ef of si fp r ae# nc im of rt e ao n l 1" ( oo' 6: v "f e . f r 6vi, i 9e" w =, ,: J: . ""n u" mn n -i| g oä . r a:' lz* c;U ilu iar' r" r yr: o: ro l t: wo: ,"i a cl: R-H p i =u: r s. i o"' , m" ioT a ti: c't " ' col il l* i' a ä rt yhi el r T oo wr} sig '" ,i n" D " Bo' f i =ht # d o rto sao ls b"l ry u sc hi 'l ia Et e =d ec xi tl ri ua sr oy m ro esw 's (arrows) right of top
245

Gymnostomatea
*.*
.#iti:1::it::';'i!:i::L,;,,,Xt,,.;.,,;r4,
i 'ii !?i+ :t r , , ,;#,T, , *# .1 ':'wiv::1:',.,',t; r,
oM,l",ffi,lr,t',',r,,f,f'ii,i,,.,it,
# .- .Wü ,qa,,
#,,,1..,,.,ti;,wt),,u.' .*... W
# ,* :##'
#'e"*;
rr*::
:,!,tl:r:ii ;:i:::li:l ::;
t*,#
,,,@,
ffi.,"',ffij.,. ,,ffi,, *# ', ,t. .., #.,., .#, ',','3.:";*t::;'1,1,,.1 ::":':'
:*,,, .u.qi..!'"*#-r*t.r tW r:", :t, ,: . ;, 'r ,'' , ,1,,i;' ,;;: it1 tl iw ffift: ' . ,w . **, *
,,*,o,'.ffi" :,r
.#|rr',,,,'t'..ä*-ffi,,*,,ffir,,, "#
t,W; #
t #,
*:'1,,,, """ ,,#t *,#,
W ffil:i :l! '",.wr,, *t',,.W,1;;,;,;,,, "# ':f fi f1 irr i. (i t0 !'4 i.'. , :, ' ##, ,tffi #3S
+l
,,, , 'l iiliil i:ilr,,,;,::?iiirr/:/,,i,i1,":' :, .f _fi .r -" t't r' .' {: ti i. r' 'i ,' 1!/ i. ':!,i:f::f:ti:,:: ''- #.* * 'N' *,
o#"
#,rm,,,
i#
:**wh,ffi,,; fi
!# *il,;** * ;'.
i'ffii,,,; YW''
'*üi, ,?ü ,t*' 'h. J*: . l **T 't **, , #:& t: * ,':+ ,:1. T,. .:, . i1
I {
'#.,tt '&.t ,,,,,,fu ,,?i
b; 4
#
.ry-
Teuthophrys trisulca africana (374rJ, original silver carbonate impregnations tiom an Australian iloodplain population.). 37, 38: Lefi and
right side of same specimen showing general organization of ciliary pattem (for details, see Fig. 35, 36, 39, 40). The specimen was heavily
squashed to show as many details as possible. There are about 180 ciliary rows and black patches ofextrusomes in the oral bulge ofthe pro-
boscides. Arrow marks region shown at higher magnification in Figures 35, 36. 39: Three-rowed dorsal brush of specimen shown in Figure
37. Some ciliary rows abut to right brush row (arrows). 40: kft anterior end of specimen shown in Figure 38. The ciliary rows are curved
and very densely ciliated anteriorly, that is, on the oral 1obes. CO = circumoral ciliary row, DB = dorsal brush, E = extrusomes.
246

Gymnostomatea
Teuthophrys 1isulcaafricana\4145,original scar.rning electron micrographs llom an Australian tloodplain population).'11,42,43: Central,
unciliated oral area, from which the three oral lobes emerge. The central, triangular area (arrows) can be widely opened during feeding (43).
44,45: Surface views of oral bulge showing a wavy structure in the bulge centre; possibly, the bulge can be opened along this line during
feeding. The bulge, which contains numerous extrusomes (Fig. 25, 28,31,33,46,47), is conspicuously striated, very likely due to microtubule
ribbons originating from the circumoral ciliary row. CO = circumoral ciliary row.
241

Gymnostomatea
*l& .,,in Tl
?ii)-::
,:,,,a-*.
',* ,,,#.,,, n ,.
# ü.* -* * .. #. .. {.. |.
.. .* .', .i, r *ut
,t :, ;:i ,;j: # ,. : '*'..:: :,|',* :j *, ::* *:, ; ,,* ;' ;# ',, ,. ä. :!
*'
#! *.'. .4
@li:il ,i i't :: .,t :i :i, .. : ", i,: r. 1,) ::: :1t: :: 'l.: :; :'E l: :'' .t: :'i: :::l :lt ni j): *:, :t +' W ,tt''
. * i :n'i i : r :
t ,T W4 *.; .. , :? n*. ii'#,
,1t.f.r*r./,*,;,:t'*'ün'
'*"|tl.,P*
'4
*
",',',,i
,.*,
.*.t::::i
,#t fr,,,.,.t
*l**"'l
',1§l:
,.,:*l
,*
4i'
'ffirtu'ffii..iffi
'*' .4,ttitij1t:#,::i?äll
4'*: "tjtil''t;.rfijf'r. i,-;,ü t::...,,*.l
P ''..:. 1 *. "" 'i l/ #j; 't :l '.t 'l
:
-:*,:::l
t:*:,a:,t'.:tW
i::#:t!.11
',tttt;it:t:::,:tt:ttl::
,::tliti#:,:::.:
t'.,1- 1:- ::, :'.- , :,* |- #.: tq r: "' .,:: * w )ililt:i:t&:..
,ü ,W::Mi
*, -:t:- -.-.:-.. '. -,.-, -.|;fji)
*, 'ti##t:i t:"1':!'tt
f;ri,*t. ,'+.* ,.*t 1 n)'
,r,,: ,4,r,,
i:t:' ,t*. ,,,,'e;i!i',',,,,,, .*,,,,,,::t .*::
.*i,:
.,:!:*tt*... :::,:| ,r;,r,n*n*r;'uli'lltll!'
,: $,: : 1. |,!1,t :' **: ' ,: t: :: ,: :' ,| :: i:: ttl ,:: :#| : :: :? ,.: ;1; : i:,: t:: ::::: t,',, ;, ,1 '; t. t. ,',, ,', 1 :, , " ,i , -'i# * i,;: ;,;l, ..l.i '.,r, ,i ..,. ., ..i.t 1.', ; .tl '.l ;i l i.l # ., ; 'il i, ,#" t .;,.,t....
.
,*;., t',*"' ' *;,,:.;1;,,1;,;:;,y::,:1:,;,,1,;
Teuthophrys trisulca africana (46-50, original silver carbonate impregnations fiom an Australian floodplain population). 'l'he oral lobes are
contracted and thus inconspicuous. The extrusomes within the lobes form a conspicuous black band. 46, 47: Dorsal view showing the dorsal
brush (arrows), which extends from the top of the lobe (asterisk) to near posterior body end, to be composed of three rows of specialized
cilia (see next plate). Only one of the three lobes has a brush! 48: Ventral view showing circular, unciliated posterior pole centre (arrow),
which contains the excretory pores of the contractile vacuole. 49: The oral bulge is surrounded by a circumoral ciliary row. 50: The ciliature
is loosened at the right side of the oral lobes (cp. Fig. 35, 36). CO = circumoral ciliary row, E = extrusomes, pR = proboscis.
248

Gymnostomatea
Teuthophrys trisulca africana (51-55, original scanning electron micrographs tiom an Australian floodplain population). 5l-55: Dorsal
brush. Only one ofthe three lobes (proboscides) bears a brush (Fig. 37, 38), which extends on a flat crest having a rope-like structure at the
left margin (Fig. 55, arrow). The brush, which extends from the top of the lobe to near body end (Fig. a6), consists of three rows of short,
paired cilia. Figure 52 is a higher magnification of the posterior brush end of the specimen shown in Figure 5 I (arrowhead). Figure 54 shows
the central area of Figure 53 (arrowhead) at higher magnification. DB = dorsal brush.
249

Gymnostomatea
62
Teuthophrys trisulcatrisulca (56-63, liorn ClgnAgNf-lf'fODE & VERSAVEL 1967 an<I originals of sar.r.re population suppliecl by G. VER-
SAVEL, Paris University . 56, 51 ,60, in vivo; 58, 59, 62, 63, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation; 6l , Feulgen stain). 56, 57, 60: Speci-
mens with extended (56,57) and contracted (60) oral lobes.58: Frontal view showing the 3 oral lobes, which are directed counterclockwise.
59: Proximal portion of an oral lobe. 61: The macronucleus of 7- trisulca. trisulca is long, tortuous, and indistinctly moniliform. 62: Triangu-
lar, unciliated oral field at base oforal lobes. 63: Optical section oforal basket. CO = circumoral ciliary row, CR = somatic ciliary rows, CV =
contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes, MA = macronucleus, N = nematodesmata (oral basket rods).
250

Gymnostomatea
6S
67 68
Teuthophrys trisulca trtsuka (64-6t1, fiorn CLEMENT-IFTODE & VERSAVEL 1967 and originals of same population supplied by G.
VERSAVEL, Paris University . 64, 67 ,68, protargol impregnation; 65, 66, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation). 64: Distal portion of
an oral lobe showing the oral bulge armed with extrusomes, and fibre bundles (nematodesmata) originating from the circumoral ciliary row.
65, 66: Only one of the three oral lobes has a dorsal brush, which is composed of three rows (arrows in 66) of narrowly spaced, short, paired
cilia (cp. Fig. 5 1-55). 67, 68: The subspecies T. trisulca trisulca is green due to numerous symbiotic algae, which stain intensely with protar-
gol.CO=circumoralciliaryrow,CR=ciliaryrows,E=extrusomes,N=nematodesmata,SA=symbioticgreenalgae.
25t

Gymnostomatea
B alantidion EBERHARD, 862
1
Improv ed diagno s is: AcropisthiidaeFOISSNER&FOISSNER, 1988 withthreetofourdorsalbrush
rows and condensed, longitudinally arranged oralized somatic monokinetids. Oral bulge low and flat. Extru-
somes rod-shaped.
T y p e s p e c i e s (by monotypy): Balantidion pellucidum EBERHARD,1862.
S y s t e m a t i c p o s i t i o n: Balantidion has an apical cytostome, three to fourbrush rows, extrusomes
within the oral bulge, and oral basket rods originating from the oral dikinetids and from oralized somatic mono-
kinetids (Fig. 10, 15b,22,24,25). Accordingly, it belongs to the Acropisthiidae, as defined by FOISSNER &
FOISSNER (1988) and FOISSNER (1996a), and not to the Enchelyidae, as indicated by the combination with
Enchelys GÜTSCHLI 1889, KAHL 1930). within the Acropisthiidae, EBERHARD's species represents a dis-
tinct organization type, and thus Balantidion EBERHARD, 1862 is resurrected. Do not mix genus name with
Balantidium CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN, 1858, vestibuliferid, parasitic ciliates.
So far, the Acropisthiidae contained five genera, which were mainly distinguished by the shape of the extru-
somes (FOISSNER 1998a, L999, FOISSNER & FOISSNER 1988): nail-like in Fuscheria, graver-like in Actino-
rhabdos, rod-shaped in Acropisthium, clavate in Diplites, and fusiform in Sikorops. Balantidion, which has rod-
shaped extrusomes, differs from Acropisthiumby the oral bulge (flat and low vs. conical ald high) and the ar-
rangement of the oralized somatic monokinetids (longitudinally vs. sloped to right). Both, Acropisthium and Bal-
antidion, differ from the other genera by the conspicuous, subapical ciliary girdle, which is reminiscent of -+
Monodinium.
B alantidion p ellucidum EBERHARD, 1 862
1862 Balantidion pellucidzrz EBERHARD, Oster-Programm der Realschule zu Coburg, Jahr 1862:25.
1924 Holophrya kessleri MERESCHKOWSKI - FAURE-FREMIET, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg., 6: 34 (misidentifica-
tion; redescription from life).
1927 Lagynus faurei KAHL, 1927, Arch. Protistenk., 60: 107 (new species for Holophrya kessleri sensu FAURE-
FREMIET 1924; redesciption from life).
1930 Enchelys (Balantidion) pellucida EBERHARD,1862 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., l8: 98 (revision).
1950 Enchelys mutans MERMOD (ev. E. pellucida EBERHARD) - GELEI & SZABADOS, Annls biol. Univ.
szeged., L: 213, 291 (redescription).
l9l4 Enchelys pellucida EBERHARDT, 1862 - DRAGESCO, IFTODE & FRYD-VERSAVEL, Protistologica,
10: 59 (redescription after silver impregnation).
1977 Enchelyodon ovum GROLIERE, Annls Stn limnol. Besse, l0:269 (new synonym).
Taxonomy
Synonymy of Balantidion pellucidum and Lagynus faurei is evident and was also proposed by KAHL (1930).
Enchelyodon ovum, obviously described mainly from silver-impregnated specimens, is very likely also B. pellu-
cidum, as indicated by the wide, flat oral bulge (Fig. 5), the narrowly spaced cilia at the anterior end of the so-
matic ciliary rows (Fig. 7), wrd the circumoral basal body pairs clearly shown, however, only in conjugating
specimens (Fig. 6 and Fig. 26 in GROLIERE 1977a and our Fig. 15b).
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 70-100 x2545 trtmt.
I
ggBRFIaRO ( 1862) gives a length of 170 pm, which is certainly wrong, as indicated by other unreliable measurements in his paper, fbr ex-
ample, Loxocephalus luridus 340 pm vs. 160 pm according to literature data (for review, see FOISSNER et a1..1994).
252

Gymnostomatea
2) Body roughly cylindrical to slightly bursiform, that is, anterior (oral) portion only slightly narrowed, trans-
versely truncated and without distinct bulge, posterior end broadly rounded (Fig. 8, 9,12,13,17,20).
3) Macronucleus in mid-body, globular to ellipsoidal (Fig. 5, 9,12,16,24).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end (Fig. 5, 9,12,16).
s) Extrusomes (toxicysts) 4-6 x 0.8 pm, rod-shaped and slightly inflated posteriorly (Fig. 15a), scattered in oral
bulge and cytoplasm (Fig. 9, 13,16,23,24). Cortex densely granulated and usually with distinct ridges be-
tween ciliary rows (Fig. 8,14,17-20,26).
6) About 25-40 meridional rows of widely spaced cilia, except for apical end, where densely spaced cilia form a
conspicuous girdle. Underneath girdle a narrow, unciliated, ring-shaped zone. Anterior end of three to four
dorsal ciliary rows with minute (1 pm), paired cilia (dorsal brush; clearly recognizable only after silver im-
pregnation and with the scanning electron microscope, not necessary for identification; Fig. I , 9-13 , 11-23).
1) Oral apparatus large, occupies flat anterior end; oral bulge indistinct, surrounded by a circumoral ciliary row,
which forms, together with the densely ciliated anterior portion of the somatic ciliary rows, a conspicuous
girdle (Fig. 9-13, l5b, Il,18,20-23).
8) Swims moderately rapidly by rotation about main body axis.
Similar species
Many species and genera with a rather similar overall appearance, but different fine structural features exist
(some examples shown in Fig. 1-4), making live identification difficult. However, the following character com-
bination is unique and should facilitate reliable live identification of B. pellucidum: pelagic; about 70-100x
2545 pm; cylindrical to slightly bursiform; anterior portion invariably rather broad and without distinct oral
bulge; conspicuous ciliary girdle at anterior end; rather distinct cortical ridges. Separation from other genera of
family, see genus section. 1, 2, 5 (extrusomes rod-shaped, cortical ridges), 6 (ciliary girdle) are key characters for
identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Planktonic and among macrophytes. Likely more common than indicated by lit-
erature data. Locus classicus unknown, but likely near Coburg, Germany, where FBERHARD (1862) lived and
worked. The locus classicus of the synonym Enchelyodon oyum is in the Besse-en-Chandesse area, France,
where GROLIERE (1977a) discovered it in a pond (Pisseport) when temperatures were low (7-8' C).
Records substantiated by illustrations: freshwaters near Paris, France (DRAGESCO et al. 1974, FAURE-
FREMIET 1924); among leaves in the swamery of the Zoological Garden of Hamburg, Germany, during March
(KAHL 1921a); about 10 cm deep rain water puddle in Szeged, Hungary, during late autumn (GELEI 8. SZA-
BADOS 1950); abundant in the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria, during March (Fig. 15, 1l-26).
I
Records not substantiated by illustrations: up to 7000 ind. I (late August) in a eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer
Weiher) in Bonn, Germany, during late summer, autumn and winter (WILBERT 1969); hypertrophic lake (Heili-
gensee) near Berlin, Germany (SKIBBE 1991; as Enchelys cf. pellucida); reservoirs of the Seversky Donets ba-
sin, USSR (KRAVCHENKO 1969); up to 3000 ind. l-' in the 1.5-2.0 m zone of Priest Pot, a productive freshwa-
ter pond in England, during late June (FINLAY et al. 1988; as Enchelys sp., 60 pm, with small illustration).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on green flagellates (Chlamydomonas, Haematococcus
pluvialis, Phacus pyrum), dinoflagellates, and ciliates (DRAGESCO etal.1974, GELEI & SZABADOS 1950,
GROLIERE 19'7'7a, our observations). Biomass of 106 specimens about 60mg (our calculations). Reliably re-
corded from Europe only. Throughout the year planktonic in eutrophic, mesosaprobic waters. Possibly a rare spe-
cies.
253

Gymnostomatea
3 4
Enchelys species, which should not be confused with Bulhrtticlion pelluc:idunt
(1, from FOISSNER 1984;Za-c, 3,4, from KAHL 1926, 1930; 2d, from VU-
XANOVICI 1963. l-4, tn vivo). L,2a-d,: Lateral views of Enchelys gastero-
stetts, 30-100 x 20-40 pm, usually 40-70 pm long (see FOISSNER et al.
1995). 3: Ventral view of Enchelys simplex, 150 prm. 4: Ventral view of
Enc'helys pupa, a very flexible species, length 54 pm.
Balantidion pellucidum (the synonym Enchelyodon ovum from GROLIERE
1911a.5, in vivo?; 6,J, protargol impregnation).5: Broad (squashed?) speci-
men, in vivo? 65-85 x 48-65 pm. 6: Conjugating specimens. 7: Dorsolateral
view of ciliary pattern. CO = circumoral ciliary row, CR = ciliary rows, CV =
contractile vacuole, DB = dorsal brush, E = extrusomes, GI = ciliary girdle
formed by narrowly spaced cilia at anterior end of somatic ciliary rows, OB =
oral basket (nematodesmata), MA = macronucleus.
251

Gymnostomatea
Itttr /
t_
G
;:DB
Yl-t
CO
-DB
\
oa
a
t-ta
G
a
o
nl
-DB a
5a
o
o
15b
=Cn
Balantidion pellucidum (8, from EBERHARD 1862; 9,, from FAURE-FREMIET
1924;10, from GELEI & SZABADOS l95C; 11, 16, from DRAGESCO et al. 1914.
12, from KAHL 1930; 13, 14, from KAHL 1927a; 15a, b, originals. B, 9, 12-15, in
vivo; 10, 1 l, 16, silver nitrate impregnation). 8, 9, 12, 13: Total views, length
10*100 pm. Note that EBERHARD also recognized the distinct cortical ridges, a spe-
cific feature of B. pelluc'idum. 10, 11: Ciliary pattern of dorsolateral side, ? Ir,r.
107 prm. 14: Innumerable colourless cortical granules (about 1 x 0.5 pm) form an in-
conspicuous fringe (cp. tri5.26).15a: Extrusome (toxicyst), 4-6 x 0.8 pm. 15b: Ante-
rior end of a somatic ciliary row (see Fig.22).16: Main cell organelles. CO = circu-
moral ciliary row, CR = somatic ciliary rows, CV = contractile vacuole, DB = dorsal
brush, E = extrusomes (toxicysts), FV = food vacuoles, GI - ciliary girdle formed by
the circumoral ciliary row and the narrowly spaced cilia of the anterior portion of the
somatic ciliary rows, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, OB = orä1 basket
(nematodesmata originating from anterior portion of somatic ciliary rows).
255

Gymnostomatea
Balantidion pellucidum (scanuing electron rnicrographs of a population fiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria). 17-20:
Dorsal views ofvery early dividers (arrows mark proliferating somatic row [17] and new brush rows tl8l) and details, such as the distinct cor-
tica.l ridges, the dorsal brush and the ciliary girdle. A narrow zone undemeath the ciliary girdle is unciliated, as already recognized by KAHL
(Fig. 13). DB = dorsal brush, GI = ciliary girdle formed by circumoral ciliary row and anterior portion of somatic ciliary rows.
256

Gymnostomatea
W
ft ;efl
E,,g!,,'
F',W,,-;1rr,,
: .
,U,,.
.::,,.:,,,.,",,ri;i;;;,,,;.,;;,;,11;i,
äd" äs
Balantidion pellucidum (21-26, oliginals of a population tl'orn the eutrophic pond aI Salzburg University, Austtia.2l,23, scanning electron
micrographs; 22,intefiererrce contrast micrograph from preserved specimen; 24-26,protargol impregnation). 21,23: Oblique anterior polar
views showing the conspicuous ciliary girdle and extrusomes emerging from the flat oral bulge (23).22: The oral bulge ofB. pellucidum is
surrounded by a circumoral ciliary row composed of basal body pairs (arrows) and narrowly spaced, ciliated somatic basal bodies forming a
conspicuous girdle (arrowhead) 24,25: Main cell organelles. 26: Between the ciliary rows (white stripes) are cortical granules which stain
heavilywithprotargol.E=extrusomes,FV=foodvacuole,Gl=ciliarygirdle,MA=macronucleus,Ml=micronucleus,OB=oralbasket
rods (nematodesmata) originating from the anterior portion of the ciliary rows and from the circumoral ciliary row.
251

Gymnostomatea
Lagy nophry a acuminata xllttr, rgzs
1935 Lagynophrya acuminataKAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 809.
1970 Lagynophrya fusidens KAHL, 1921 - GRAIN, Protistologica, 6: 37 (misidentification; redescription after
silver impregnation and transmission electron microscopy).
1986 Lagynophrya acuminataKAHL,1935 - WILBERT, Arch. Protistenk., 131: 65 (redescription from life
and after silver impregnation).
1995 Lagynophrya acuminataKAHL,1935 - FOISSNER, BERGER, BLATTERER & KOHMANN, Informa-
tionsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, Ll95: 178 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic
and ecological monograph).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
Often erroneously written Lagynophrys acuminata or Lagenophrys acuminata. The population investigated by
GRAIN (1970) cannot be L. fusidens because it has rod-shaped extrusomes (distinctly fusiform in L. fusidens;
name!) and a conspicuous oral dome (lacking or very inconspicuous in L. fusidens). The data provided by
GRAIN (1910) indicate that it was L. acuminata.
Differential diagnosis
l) Size in vivo about 70-95 x 20-30 pm.
2) Body clavate to pyriform. Anterior trunk portion often slightly to distinctly curved ventrally and with an up to
10 pm long, conical, retractable process (oral dome, oral plug, proboscis; Fig. 1-3, 6, 1 1).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, ellipsoidal (Fig. 2, 3, 8).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end (Fig. 1, 8).
5) Two types of rod-shaped extrusomes (toxicysts) in oral dome (checked in 2 populations): type 1 distinctly
curved, 11-18 x0.4pm; type2straightar,d34pmlong(Fig.2,3,5).Cortexdenselygranulatedbytwo
types of mucocysts.
6) Usually aboü22-25, rarely up to 30 (Fig. 6) meridional ciliary rows, three of which bear very short (<1 pm),
paired cilia and extend from oral dome to near mid-body (dorsal brush; clearly recognizable only after silver
impregnation and in the scanning electron microscope; not necessary for identification; Fig. 1,4-14).
7) Oral apparatus at anterior trunk end, composed, inter iia, of an up to 10 pm long, conical, retractable oral dome
(fragile! easily distorted), the base of which is encircled by an inconspicuous circumoral ciliary row (Fig. 1-12).
8) Swims fast by rotation about main body axis.
Similar species
Lagynophrya rostrata KAHL, 1927 a is very similar, except for the fusiform extrusomes (rod-shaped in L. acumi-
nata). Trachelophyllum species are usually more slender and longer (>100 pm) and have two macronuclear
beads. -+ Pelagolacrymaria moserae (10-21 macronuclear nodules), P. rostrata (KAHL, 1935) and Phialina
species (oral dome truncated) have a spirally ciliated head.2,3, 5 (extrusomes rod-shaped),7 (conical,retract-
able oral dome) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic in stagnant waters throughout the year (SCHÖNBERGER 1994,
WILBERT 1986a). Locus classicus very likely near Hamburg, Germany, where KAHL (1935) lived and worked
and found L. acuminata in the pelagial of clean ponds. GRAIN (1970) observed it in the oxygen rich, cold (7" C)
surface layer of Lake Aydat, France, during spring. WILBERT (1969, 1986a) recorded it from a eutrophic pond
258

Gymnostomatea
(Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Bonn, Germany, where it occured throughout the year, with a peak (5000 ind. lr) in
summer. We found L. acuminata in the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University during summer (Fig. 8-14) and in a
eutrophic lake (Höglwörther See) in Bavaria, Germany (Fig. 6, 7). Records not substantiated by illustrations: clean
groundwater ponds in Styria, Austria, peaking (116 ind.l-r) during summer (KRAINER 1988); up to 1000 ind.lr
r)
(annual mean biomass 2 pg fresh mass I in the shallow, mesotrophic, alkaline Neusiedler See and up to
2000 ind. 1-r in a nearby reedless brown-water pond in eastern Austria (SCHÖNBERGER 199a);) eu- to polytro-
phic lake (Meerfelder Maar) in Germany (PACKROFF 1992, PACKROFF & WILBERT l99l).
Records of Lagynophrya sp., probably L. acuminata or L. rostrata, from lake plankton: oligo- to mesotrophic, al-
pine lake (Piburger See) in Tyrol, Austria (MACEK et al. 1996, SCHLOTT-IDL 1984); oligo- to mesotrophic
lake in France (AMBLARD et al. 1993, 1994); Lake Constance, Germany, from March to October (WEISSE &
MÜLLER 1990); Castle Lake, California (WIACKOWSKI et al.l994a); Bowland Lake, Canada, at pH 5.1-6.1
(KELLER et al. 1992). Possibly, L. rostrata (length of preserved specimens about 75 pm) from the plankton of
the eutrophic Lake Aydat, France (SIME-NGANDO & HARTMANN 1991), also refers to L. acuminata because
GRAIN (1970) recorded it, as L. fusidens (-+ synonymy), from this lake.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Probably feeds on autotrophic flagellates (WILBERT 1986a) and
ciliates. Biomass of 106 specimens about 25 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1995). FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS &
ANTONIO-GARCIA (1988; without illustration) counted about 3000 ind.l-' in a sample from the Manzanares
I
River (Spain) contaminated with 500 pg I Cd (as acetate salt) 39 days previously. Reliably recorded from
Europe only. Euplanktonic in lakes and ponds throughout the year, possibly peaking during summer. Saprobic
classification according to FOISSNER et al. (1995): oligosaprobic (o = 8, b = 2,I = 4, SI = 1.2).
ff'
MI
{l
MA
MI
aat'1o
oaaa"
a
aoa
t- Ia ro a a a ' '
loaaaa
-MA
Lagynophrya acuminata (1, 2, from KAHL 1935; 3, 4, fiom WILBERT 1986a; 5, from GRAIN l91O;5a, originals tiom populations of the
pond at Salzburg University and the Wallersee near Salzburg. 1-3, 5a, in vivo; 4, protargol impregnation; 5, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate im-
pregnation). 1: Specimen with retracted oral dome. 2, 3: Specimens with extended, conical oral dome, 80 pm, 95 pm. 4, 5: Ciliature of dor-
sal and right side, 75 pm. The black patches in (5) are fat inclusions. 5a: Long (1 1-18 pm) and short (4 pm) extrusomes in oral dome. CO =
circumoral ciliary row, CR = ciliary rows, CV = contractile vacuole, DB = dorsal brush with about 1 pm long, paired cilia, E = extrusomes,
MA = macronucleus, MI = micronuclei, OB = oral basket rods, OD = oral dome.
259

Gyrnnostomatea
6
I
$
Lagynophrya acuminata (6, 7, originals of a population fi'onr tl.re Höglwörther See in Bavaria; tl-10, originals ol a population fion.r the
eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria. 6, 7, 10, scanning electron micrographs; 8, 9, protargol impregnation). 6: Total view of a
specimen with slightly retracted oral dome. 7, 10: Anterior portion of specimens with broad (7; same as Fig. 6) and narrow (10) oral dome.
The scanning electron micrographs show that the cilia of the circumoral row are not longer than those of the somatic rows, contrary to WIL-
BERT's figure (Fig. 3).8,9: Ventral and lateral view (optical sections) showing body shape and main cell organelles. CO = circumoral ciliary
row, CR = somatic ciliary rows, CV = contractile vacuole, DB = dorsal brush, FV = food vacuoles, MA = macronucleus, OB = oral basket
rods (nematodesmata), OD = oral dome (oral plug or proboscis).
260

Gymnostomatea
Lagynophrya acuminata loriginal scanning electron micrograpl.rs of a population f}om the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austlial'
ll-14,:I_,eftlateral (11) and dorsal view (13), as well as details ofthe antedor body portion (12) and the posterior brush region (14). Lagyno-
phrya dcuminata, which is slightly curved to the ventral side (9, 1 1), has a rather large, conical, rctractable oral dome (oral plug, proboscis)'
The three rows (arrows in 13) ofthe dorsal brush are separated from each other and from the abutting somatic ciliary rows by cortical ridges,
which are as high or even higher than the very short (<1 Um), paired,cilia of the brush (12, l4). CO = circumoral ciliary row, DB = dorsal
brush, OD = oral dome.
26r

Gymnostomatea
Lepidotrachelophyllum line are GEpsr, 1 e60) ForssNER, l ee4
1960 Trachelophyllum lineare LEPSI, Comunle Acad. Rep. pop. rom., 10: 1097.
1984 Lepidotachelophyllum fornicis NICHOLLS & LYNN, 1984, J. Protozool., 3l: 413 (synonym; see LYNN
& NICHOLLS 1985 for further ultrastructural data).
1994 Lepidotrachelophyllum lineare (LEPSI, 1960) - FOISSNER, Kataloge des O.Ö. Landesmuseums,ll:2'r.5
(synonymization of 7. lineara and L. fornicis; combining author).
Differential di agnosis
1) Size in vivo usually 300-500 x 6V125 pm, total length range 40-600 pm.
2) Body outline usually flask-shaped or obclavate, distinctly flattened or almost leaflike (Fig. 2,5, 6, 9). Dis-
torted specimens from nearly spherical to fusiform (Fig. 8). Very extensible.
3) Two (rarely 1) ellipsoidal, distinctly separate macronuclear nodules in midline of cell (Fig. 2, 4-6,9).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end (Fig. 2, 6,9).
s) Two types of extrusomes: type 1 are short, ellipsoidal mucocysts; type 2 are inconspicuous, rod-shaped oral
toxicysts (size not known). Cell covered by complex, broadly conical, organic scales 4-8 x 2-5 pm in size
forming an about 3-8 pm thick epicortical layer through which the cilia emerge (Fig. l-3, 5,6,9-12).
6) About 30 meridional ciliary rows, two of which have short bristles (clavate cilia) in the anterior third (dorsal
brush; clearly recognizable only after silver impregnation, not necessary for identification; Fig. 2,4,7).
1) Oral dome inconspicuous, occupies narrow (8-20 pm) anterior end, at its base a circumoral row composed of
basal body pairs bearing only one cilium each (Fig. 1, 5, 6, 7,9; details of oral apparatus only recognizable
after silver impregnation, not necessary for identification).
B) Swims slowly at about 65 pm s-r.
Similar species
Lepidotrachelophyllum NICHOLLS & LYNN, 1984 is monotypic, that is, includes only the present species.
However, we know some other (undescribed), mainly benthic species. Furthermore, two Trachelophyllum spe-
cies are known to have a mucilage or gelatinous covering, namely T. vestitum STOKES, 1884a and T. sigmoides
KAHL, 1926. The latter species, which has a similar size and shape as L. lineare, needs detailed redescription to
show whether the covering is amorphous or composed of epicortical scales; at the present state of knowledge,
synonymy of T. sigmoides and L. lineare cannot be excluded. Spetazoon australiense FOISSNER, 1994a, which
is also rather similar to L. lineare in size an shape, has globular epicortical scales 2-3 pm across and is known so
far only from the soil of a dry river dam in Australia. Trachelophyllum apiculatum (PERTY, 1852) CLA-
PAREDE & LACHMANN, 1859, is much smaller (90-180 pm, usually 100-150 pm long) and has an incon-
spicuous epicortical layer (detailed description, see FOISSNER et al. 1995, p. 180). l, 5 (structure of epicortical
layer) and the planktonic life style are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Rare in lake plankton. The locus classicus is near Braila, Romania, where LEPSI
(1960) discovered Iepidotrachelophyllum lineare in a polluted pond at 5 oC in early November. The locus classi-
cus of the synonym L. fornicis is in Ontario, Canada, where NICHOLLS & LYNN (1984) discovered it at the
dam outflow of White Lake.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Likely camivorous or omnivorous. Biomass of 106 medium-sized
specimens about 500 mg. Refrigeration of subsamples of lake water, together with associated algal and organic
262

Gymnostomatea
debris from the net collection, at about 5 "C have provided specimens for up to 2 weeks (NICHOLLS & LYNN
1984). After two days at room temperature, some specimens rounded up and were covered by a thicker layer of
scales; presumably a resting stage which was not discovered during the warm seasons. Reliably recorded from
Europe and North America. Euplanktonic, likely a cold water stenotherm. Possibly more common than indicated
by the sparse literature data.
il SL
ffi OB
rG
3
1
CO OD
I
t)
MA
MI
I
\
l.
It
Lepidotrachelophyllum lineare (1-3, from LEPSI 1960; 4-8, from
NICHOLLS & LYNN 1984. 1-3,5,6, B, in vivo; 4,J,, Chatton-Lwoff
silver nitrate impregnation). 1,3: Anterior body portion with 3-8 pm
thick epicortical scale layer at high magnifications. 2, 5, 6, 8: Repre-
sentative specimens (2 = up to 600 pm long, 5, 6 - up to 350 prm
long) and shape and size variants (8, smallest specimen only 40 pm
long!). 4: Ciliary pattern of dorsal side, 225 Stm.7: Ciliary pattern of
dorsal anterior body portion showing circumoral ciliary row (only the
posterior basal body of the dikinetids is ciliated), somatic ciliary rows
(cilia 10*15 pm long), and the 2 dorsal brush rows (arrows) bearing
short, clavate bristles. CO = circumoral ciliary row, CR = somatic cili-
ary rows, CV = contractile vacuole, FG = fat globules, MA = macro-
nuclear nodule, MI = micronuclei (usually 2, rarely 3), OB = oral bas-
ket with toxicysts, OD = oral dome, SL = scale layer.
263

Gymnostomatea
Lepidotrachebphyllum lineare (9- I 2, lionl N ICHOLLS & LYN N I 9ti4. 9, Bou in-f ixed specimel; I 0, i1 vivo phase conrr.ast; I I , electron
micrograph; 12, in vivo interference contrast micrograph). 9,12:.Total view and anterior body portion showing the 3-8 pm thick scale layer
(arrows in l2), the contractile vacuole, and the macronuclear nodules (asterisks in 9). 10: Detail ofthe edge ofan air-dried cell showing the
"foamy" nature of the scale layer. 11: Scales are composed of a baseplate perforated by small apertures and a conical superstructure com-
posed or larger apertures. CV = contractile vacuole, MA = anterior macronuclear nodule, SL = scale layer.
264

Gymnostomatea
P elagolacrymaria nov. gen.
Di ag n o s i s: Lacrymariidae withbody dividedinto oral dome, headandtrunk. Oral dome very conspicuous,
conical, contractile. Trunk and head acontractile, covered by distinctly spiralized ciliary rows. Two girdles of
ciliated dikinetids, one at posterior end ofhead ciliary rows, the other at anterior end oftrunk ciliary rows.
Typ e sp ec i es'. Pelagolacrymariamoserae nov. spec.
E t y m o I o g y: Composite of the Greek nounpeldgios (living in the open ssa = planktonic) and the Latin noun
lacrima (tear drop, indicating relationship with the type genus of the family Lacrymaria).
,
Comparison with related genera: Pelagolacrymariadiffersfromtheothergeneraofthe
family, viz. Lauymaria, Phialina and Phialinides, mainly by the distinct girdles of dikinetids and the oral dome,
which is extraordinarily large and contractile, like that of -+ Lagynophrya acuminata. The dikinetidal girdle at
the posterior end of the head resembles Phialinides FOISSNER, 1988b, whose girdle consists, however, of
monokinetids (Fig. 13, 1a).
Other species assignable to Pelagolacrymaria:
Pelagolacrymariamoseraehighlyre-
sembles Lacrymaria rostrata KAHL, 1935, both in structure and habit (Fig. 9, 10). KAHL (1935) already noted:
"A species which considerably deviates from the genotype and occurs only in the plankton, where it moves very
fast, possibly hunting exclusively codonellids (planktonic -+ tintinnid oligotrichs)". Thus, it is transferred to the
new genus: Pelagolacrymaria rostrata (KAHL, 1935) nov. comb. (basionym: Lacrymaria rostrata KAHL, 1935).
Pelagolacrymaria moserae differs from P. rostrata by the macronucleus (multinodal vs. reniform).
P elagolacrymaria mo er&e nov. spec.
s
D i ag no s i s: Size invivo about l00x30pm. Obclavate, oral dome about20pm long, headbarrel-shaped,
trunk ellipsoidal. 13 macrcinuclear nodules and l7 ciliary rows on average. Extrusomes filiform, about 25 pm
long, form distinct bundles in oral dome and posterior half of trunk. Dikinetidal girdle at posterior end of head
composed of 1 row, that at anterior end of trunk of 2 rows.
Type location:
HöglwörtherSee, asmalllakeinsouthemBavaria, Germany(47"49'N, 12"50'E).
T y p e s 1i d e s: Three slides (l holotype ar:rdZparatypes) with protargol-impregnated specimens have been
deposited in the Oberösterreichische Landesmuseum in Linz (LI), Austria.
D e d i c at i o n: We dedicate this beautiful species to Brigitte MOSER forherexcellenttechnical help over
many years.
D i f f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (detailed morphometric data, see Table on next page)
1) Size in vivo 1(:--120 x 2540 pm, length of trunk about 60 pm; acontractile, except of oral dome.
2) Overall shape obclavate with minute tubercles in anterior trunk region, very susceptible to environmental
changes, that is, the oral dome and trunk became more or less distinctly retracted, respectively, inflated in
stressed specimens (Fig. l, 2, 5, 15, 17-21,23). Oral dome in vivo 15-25 pm long, narrow-conical (Fig. 1, 4,
5), lanceolate and <10 pm long when contracted (Fig. 2, 12, 15-19,23); head barrel-shaped to broadly coni-
cal, conspicuous because densely ciliated; trunk ellipsoidal, acontractile, crosshatched by ciliary rows in un-
dernourished specimens, cortex of anterior, tuberculate portion unstained by protargol (Fig.1 ,24).
3) lO-21 , usually about 1 3 macronuclear nodules in centre of trunk; nodules globular, ellipsoidal (up to 2: 1) or
dumb-bell shaped, form monilate, tortuous strand when connected by filamentous structure in about half of
specimens; fuse to globular mass during cell division (Fig. 1 , 1 , 8, 18, 24, 25).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end with about 6 excretory pores in posterior pole area (Fig. l, 8, l8).
265

Gymnostomatea
5) Extrusomes 20-30 x 0.3-0.5 pm, form single bundle in oral dome and head, and about 10 bundles in poste-
rior half of trunk (Fig. l-3, 8, 16, I 9, 25, 31). Cortical granules about 0.5 pm across, colourless, scattered be-
tween ciliary rows.
6) 16*19, usually about 17 distinctly right-spiralling ciliary rows on head and trunk; ciliary rows distinctly sepa-
rated from dikinetidal girdles at posterior end of head and anterior end of trunk (Fig. 1, 8, 11, 12, 15, 16,20,
21,26-30, 32, 33). Cilia about 10 pm long, those of anterior basal bodies of trunk dikinetids shortened to in-
conspicuous bristles (Fig. 8).
7) Oral dome as described above, opens widely during prey ingestion, at its base a dikinetidal circumoral ciliary
row, from which conspicuous fibres extend anteriorly into the oral dome and posteriorly into the head, where
they form a curious, cup-shaped structure (Fig. 1, 2, 6, 8, ll, 12, 16,21,22,26-30; details of oral apparatus
recongnizable only after silver impregnation and not necessary for identification).
8) Swims slowly by rotation about main body axis.
Table: Morphometric data from Pelagolacrymarin moserae.
Characterr Mean M SD SE CV Min Max n
Body, length 86.1 88 tt.9 2.6 13.8 6l 108 2t
Body, width 32.t 32 1.4 1.0 1 3.8 24 40 2t
Oral dome, length t7.8 t9 2.8 0.6 15.7 t2 2t 2T
Oral dome, width at head 1.5 7 0.6 0. 1 8.0 7 9 2l
Head, length tt.2 11 0.9 0.2 8.3 9 l2 2l
Head, width 10.9 11 0.5 0. 1 4.9 10 t2 2I
Oral dome and head, length 29.0 30 3.4 0.8 rt.9 2l J1'tJ 2t
Top of oral dome to proximal girdle of diki-
33.7 35 1.t 0.9 t2.t 24 39 2l
netids on trunk, distance
Top of oral dome to anterior end of trunk
31 .2 38 4.4 1.0 tt.9 27 13 2I
ciliary rows, distance
Macronuclear nodules, length 8.2 8 2.3 0.5 27.1 5 I6 2t
Macronuclear nodules, width 6.5 6 1.1 0.2 16.5 5 8 2t
Macronuclear nodules, number t3.4 t2 J-a.J 0.1 24.3 10 2l 2t
Ciliary rows on trunk, number 11 .0 t1 1.0 0.2 5.6 t6 t9 2t
Dikinetids in proximal trunk girdle, number 17 .0 t1 1.0 0.2 5.6 16 t9 2l
Data based on protargol-impregnated and mounted field specimens. Measurements in micrometres. CV = coefficient of variation in Va,M
= median, Max = maximum, Mean = arithmetic mean, Min = minimum, n = number of specimens investigated, SD = standard deviation,
SE = standard error of mean.
Similar species
This highly characteristic species can hardly be confused with any other ciliate, except for Pelagolacrymaria ros-
tratq (see genus characterization), which is distinguished from P. moserae by the single, reniform macronucleus
(Fig. 9, l0).2 and 3 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: As yet only found at type location, a small eutrophic lake in Bavaria, Germany,
where it occurred in considerable numbers in the pelagial during the late spring (May) ciliate bloom.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds mainly on other ciliates (Urotricha, oligotrichs?); some
specimens contained numerous 5 pm sized vacuoles with golden yellow chloroplasts, possibly cleptoplasts from
prey ciliates or dinoflagellates. Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens about 4J mg. Euplanktonic.
266

Gymnostomatea
GH
\
- 3
TR
-MA
--r:
taa oo
aao Oa
a a a aa
a
a
a a ao
a t, a a
aa aa a a a a a
a a a a a a t a a
a
a a
o a\
a t
t a
TF ?
fiIlii
it, I
iii
iii a 'i/
t
ir, iiiil
ilI
I
o a
a
a
a Iti
a
a
,m' a
a a
a a
a o
10 a a
o a a a
a a
a o
l": a
a
a
a
a
ol
I
PT \7
fP
6
pelagolacrymaria moserae (l-5, in vivo; 6-tl, plotargol inrpregnation). 1r 2: Representative specimen with extended and contracted oral
dome, 90 pm. 3: Extrusome, 20 pm. 4: Shape variant. 5: Well nourished specimen with many globular fat inclusions. 6: Conspicuous fibres
originate from the circumoral ciliary row and extend anteriorly into the oral dome and posteriorly into the head, where they form a cup-shaped
structure (Fig.22,27 ,30).7': A white (unstained) girdle is recognizable in the anterior region of the trunk, 70 pm. 8: Ciliary pattem of a repre-
sentative specimen (for details, see following plates), 100 pm. CO = circumoral ciliary row, CV = contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes, EP =
excretory pores, GH = girdle of basal body pairs at posterior end of head, GT = girdle of basal body pairs at anterior end of trunk, HE = head,
MA = macronucleus, OD = oral dome, pp = postciliary microtubular ribbons?, TF = transverse microtubular ribbons?, TR = trunk, TU = tu-
bercles. Pelagolacrymarin rostrata in vivo (9, 10, from KAHL 1935). 9: Total view, length l0G-120 pm. 10: Retracted oral dome.
261

Gymnostomatea
_oD
CO
_
oD
II !
I
!t s
I
'ott
t...
aaa'
olo
a
a a
1O
oa
a
a
a
oa
ao _rF
aaaa
ooa
o
o
aa a O :: : :3 3: 3:\
o
o a ttal...tt
aa H'r.. f .§
a
Oa a a a ..tit.....i
t,
at a aaaa . -. 1t
a o a aa aa aa a t._ t.^ t.t*
oo aoa
ao i.'i.}- ..... 1-o
oo' a ,,a taia a. 'ia.t'. i i
a a a a O-ttato aaa ' a. i .a a1 rr.^tlt'. it
a'o -.-tto .i.t ..1-.:
oo aor
o ao a La a- ttaa ^aa aaaaa tt la aa oi'a -a' 1- ai '.i'i:
a aa a - a t a t
o aaat
a
ta'
t
aa
a
ata
aa
a
ooo
a I
a
aa
-TR
--CR
11
Pelagolacrymaria moserae after protargol impregnation. 11: Ciliary pattern of anterior region at high magnification (cp. Fig. 8). 12: Ciliary
pattem of a specimen with retracted oral dome. CO = circumoral ciliary row, CR = somatic (trunk) ciliary rows, GH = girdle of basal body
pairs at posterior end of head, GT = girdle of basal body pairs at anterior end of trunk, HE = head, HR = head ciliary rows, OD = orai dome,
TF = transverse microtubular ribbons?, TR = trunk.
Phialinides australis afier protargol impregnation (from FOISSNER 1988b). 13, 14: General view (90 pm) and anterior body portion at high
magnification. PhialinidesdiffersfromPelagolacrymariabytheshort,acqntractileoraldome,themeridionaltrunkciliaryrows,andthelack
of basal body pairs at the posterior end of the head ciliary rows.
268

Gymnostomatea
fl§
17
pelagolacrymarin moserqe ([5, 16, scanning electron miclographs; l7-19, bright lleld and interterence conlrast lnicrographs.l. 15, 16: Total
oblique anterior polar view and detail of anterior body portion. Note distinct spiralization of trunk ciliary rows and dense ciliation of head.
The ora-l dome has partially contracted, and the exploding, emerging extrusomes appear as wormlike structures. 17-19: Rather heavily
squeezed specimens with retracted oral dome. The right specimen (19) contains many small, golden globules, possibly prey cleptoplasts. Ar-
rows in (19) mark bundles of extrusomes in trunk. CV = contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes, HE = head with spiralized ciliary rows, MA =
moniliform macronucleus, OD = oral dome (unciliated), TR = trunk with spiralized ciliary rows.
269

Gymnostomatea
l0.D
23
Pelagolacrymaria moserae (20,21, scar.rning electron rnicrographs; 22,24,25, protargol intpregnation; 23, bright Iieltl niicrograplt).20,21:
General view and detail of anterior body portion. Arrows mark tubercles ("tear drops" = Lacrymaria) in anterior trunk region. The small
globules scattered between the ciliary rows are ejected cortical granules. 22: Distirrct fibres originate from the circumoral ci1iary row and
form a cupJike structure (arrow) in the head (cp. Fig. 6, 27 ,30).23: Squeezed specimen with fully contracted oral dome. 24,25: Clliary pat-
tern and main organelles. Note highly characteristic extrusome bundles (anows in 25) in posterior half of trunk. Arrows in (24) denote girdle
of basal body pairs in anterior trunk region. CO = circumoral ciliary row; CR = trunk ciliary rows, E = extrusomes, HE = head, HR = head
ciliary rciws, MA = macronucleus, OD = oral dome, TR = trunk.
210

Gymnostomatea
ro
:HH
Gl-l
ä,.B
Pelngohalteria moserqe (26-30, protargol impregnation; 31, in vivo interl'erence contrast micrograph;32,33, scanning electron nricro-
graphs). 26-28: Anterior region of same specimen at three focal planes to show details of head and somatic ciliary pattem. A conspicuous,
cup-like structure (arrows in 27; arrowheads mark head margin) is formed by fibres extending posteriorly from the circumoral ciliary row
(cp. Fig. 6,22,30).29,30,32,33: Head details. Note especially the ciliated dikinetids (arrows in 32,33) at the posterior end of the head cili-
ary rows and the cup-like structure (arrows in 30; arrowheads mark head margin). 3L: Squashed specimen showing the 20-30 pm long, fine
extrusomes. CO = circumoral ciliary tow, E = extrusomes, 611 = girdle of basal body pairs at posterior end of head, 61 = girdle of basal
body pairs at anterior end of trunk, HR = head ciliary rows, MA = macronucleus, OD = oral dome, PF = fibres forming cupJike structure.
2lt

4.4.2 Prostomatida scHEWrAKoFF, 18e6 and Hymenostomata npLAGE &
nEnouARD, 1896
Prostomatids and hymenostomes are possibly closely related (BARDELE 1992). Only about 1 7o of the hymeno-
stomes are euplanktonic; thus they are attached to the more common pelagic prostomatids.
The Prostomatida have three main features: (i) The somatic ciliature is more or less complete (holotrichous) and
consists of meridional rows of monokinetids, that is, of single, ciliated basal bodies; basal body pairs occur only
at the anterior end of the ciliary rows. In some genera (-+ Urotricha, -s Balanion),the posterior portion of the
cell is unciliated, except for one or several elongated caudal cilia; (ii) The oral apparatus is in the centre of the
anterior end. The oral ciliature is inconspicuous: the undulating membrane (= circumoral ciliary row) surrounds
the oral opening and consists of a single row of paired basal bodies having + distinct ciliary stumps (oral flaps);
the adoral organelles, which define the ventral side, are also inconspicuous because they are on the cell surface
and composed of relatively few, short cilia. The oral basket is of the cyrtos-type and is, although composed of
distinct rods, rather inconspicuous in live specimens; (iii) Stomatogenesis (= formation of new mouth) is usually
merotelokinetal, that is, the oral ciliature originates from the anterior end of some somatic ciliary rows.
The cortex (pellicle s. l.) of most prostomatids is very complex and usually shows a distinct rectangular or hexa-
gonal pattem (cortical alveoli) reminiscent of that found in some hymenstomes, for example, -s Stokesia vernq-
/is. A special type of cortical structure occurs in -+ Coleps: the cortical alveoli contain plates of CaCO:, protect-
ing the cell like armour.
The Prostomatida comprise about 100 species, some of which are difficult to assign for inexperienced workers
because of superficial similarities with certain + Gymnostomatida. Species identification is often also very diffi-
cult because some are rather small (-+ Urotricha) or have characters difficult to recognize without silver impreg-
nation (-+ Bursellopsis). The last revision was performed, as in many other groups, by KAHL in 1930. However,
most of the common species have been redescribed and well characterized by, for example, FOISSNER & PFIS-
TER (1997) and FOISSNER et al. (1994).
Prostomatids are widely distributed in limnetic and marine habitats, but rare in soil. Occasionally, they are very
abundant, for example, --> Coleps spetai, which can cause green blooms in lakes. -+ Bursellopsis and -s Urotri-
cha species live mainly pelagically and are often, together with the --> oligotrichs, an important group in the cili-
ate plankton community; -+ Coleps species live both in the benthal and the pelagial, where they withstand the
feeding pressure of the metazooplankton because they are protected by a spiny armour (see above). Most prosto-
matids are omnivorous. However, usually they prefer other ciliates or, as -+ Bursellopsis, small metazoans, espe-
cially rotifers. Only few species are highly specialized, for example, Urotricha synuraphaga, which almost ex-
clusively ingests the chrysophycear Synura (FOISSNER 1997, KAHL 1930).
The Hymenostomata, which include the best investigated ciliates Paramecium andTetrahymena, are defined by
the following features (FOISSNER et al. 1994, p. 25): (i) The ciliature is complete (holotrichous) and consists of
narrowly spaced mono- andlor dikinetids, that is, of single andlor paired, ciliated basal bodies; (ii) The oral cilia-
ture is usually in a distinct depression (buccal cavity) and quadripartite (tetrahymenide), that is, is composed of
three solid adoral membranelles and a usually inconspicuous undulating membrane; (iii) Stomatogenesis (= for-
mation of new mouth) is parakinetal or buccokinetal, that is, the new oral apparatus originates postorally from a
parental somatic ciliary row or from the parental oral apparatus itself. In one group, the scuticociliates (e.g. -+
Histiobalantium),the new oral apparatus originates from the scuticus, a small, unciliated basal body field under-
neath the oral apparatus. Hymenostomes are common in limnetic, marine, and terrestrial biotopes. Some species
(e.9., Colpidium colpoda, Paramecium spp.) are very abundant in heavily polluted waters, including sewage
treatment plants. Most hymenostomes are bacterivorous, some are omnivorous (e.g., -+ Frontonia leucas) or
histophagous.
212

Prostomatida
Coleps hirtus subspecies hirtus Oaür-len, 1786) NrrzscH,tszi nov. stat.
lJ86 Cercaria hirta UÜt-lE,R, Animalcula Infusoria, p. 128.
1827 Coleps hirtus - NITZSCH, Cercaria, p. 69 (combining author).
1838 Coleps hirtus MÜLLER, 1786 - EHRENBERG, Infusionsthierchen, p. 317 (first reviser).
1925 Coleps hirtus (O.F.M. 1786) NITZSCH 1817 - NOLAND, Trans. Am. microsc. Soc.,44: 6 (revision).
1930 Coleps hirtus NITZSCH, 1817 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., l8: 134 (revision; incorrect author and year).
1984 Coleps hirtusNITZSCH,lS2l - FOISSNER, Stapfia, 12:22 (detailed redescription).
1994 Coleps hirtus (MUELLER, 1786) NITZSCH, 1827 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informa-
tionsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll94: 382 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic
and ecological monograph, including detailed notes on nomenclature and taxonomy).
Taxonomy
FOISSNER et al. (1994) assigned records of green, that is, zoochlorellae-bearing C. hirtus to -> C. spetai. But
now we resurrected -+ C . hirtus viridis, which is very similar to C . hirtus hirtus, except for the symbiotic algae.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 40-65 x 18-35 pm.
2) Body covered in calcified armoured plates, usually barrel-shaped, rarely cylindrical (Fig. 1, 2, 4,23,24). Ar-
mour consists of 6 plate rings (from anterior): circumoral plates, anterior collateral and main plate§, posterior
main and collateral plates, and circumanal plates. Each ring composed of 12-20, usually 15 or 16 plates. Col-
lateral armour plates each with 2, main plates each with 4 windows, in total thus 12 windows per plate row
(Fig. 1, 10,2326). Windows pretzel (= 8) shaped, ridge at left plate margin finely crenellated, never wing-like
as in -+ C. spetai, teeth of right plate margin alternately arranged to windows (Fig. 3, 11-22,30). One large
spine at an anterior collateral plate and three or four prominent spines at rear end (Fig. 1, 23-29).
3) Macronucleus globular, near mid-body (Fig. I , 2, 5 , l4).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end (Fig. 1, 4).
s) Extrusomes (toxicysts) difficult to recognize in vivo (Fig. 9, 14). Cells, especially armour, usually brown. No
(+
symbiotic green algae taxonomy).
6) 12-20, usually 15 or 16 meridional ciliary rows, each with four condensed cilia (pectinelles) at anterior end;
cilia project from small, fusiform orifices between armour plates. One distinctly elongated caudal cilium (Fig.
1,5,7,15,26).
1) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous. Undulating membrane circular, composed of
paired basal bodies, interrupted by three tiny adoral organelles (Fig. 5, 6, 14-16,25,21; details of oral cilia-
ture only recognizable after silver impregnation, not necessary for identification).
8) Movement without peculiarities, swims moderately rapidly.
Similar species
The following species have the same type of armour plates (windows 8-shaped): -+ Coleps hirtus viridis (green
due to symbiotic algae), -+ C. spetai (green due to symbiotic algae, more distinctly barrel-shaped, main armour
plates with wing-like marginal ridge, and, most important, anterior main plates with 5 windows each), -+ C.
elongatus (2 caudal cilia, 5 windows in anterior main plates), C. amphacanläzs EHRENBERG (larger, more
windows, several caudal cirri, bursiform), C. bicuspis NOLAND (only 2 spines at rear end). -+ Coleps nolandi
has armour plates with reniform windows. 2 (four windows in anterior main plates, windows 8-shaped), 5 (no
symbiotic green algae), 6 (one caudal cilium) are key characters for identification.
273

Prostomatida
Ecology
Records before l93O areomitted because C. hirtus hirtus wasnot yet separated from -+ C. nolandi.
Occurrence and distribution: Throughout the year with low to high abundances in the aufwuchs, the mud, and
the pelagial of stagnant and running waters; avoids fast current (BICK & SCHMERENBECK l97l). Also com-
mon in the rotifer- and/or crustacean-rich plankton, when other ciliates are exhausted by metazoan predation (e.g,
BERECZKY 1975); possibly, the armour or a chemical defence protect Coleps against invertebrate predation
(WICKHAM 1995b). Coleps hirtus hirtus is often associated with other Coleps species.
Locus classicus is the sea coast of Denmark (MÜLLER 1786; see FOISSNER et al. 1994 for details). Many
planktonic records from stagnant waters all over the world: in the monimolimnion (deep water layer in a mero-
mictic lake) of an Austrian lake (RUTTNER 1937); excavated groundwater ponds in Austria (KRAINER 1988);
with low abundance in a mesotrophic, alpine lake in Tyrol, Austria (SCHLOTT-IDL 1984); common in Lake
Windermere, England (LAYBOURN-PARRY & ROGERSON 1993); highly abundant in the metalimnion of
Lake Aydat, a small eutrophic lake in France (SIME-NGANDO & HARTMANN 1991); mesotrophic, iron-rich
lake in Germany (EHLERS 1965, MÜCKE 1919); in a eutrophic forest lake in Germany with a maximum of
979 ind.lr in late October (RECK 1981; -s Table 3); about 76 000 ind. l-r in a pond in Berlin, Germany, in De-
cember (SKIBBE 1994); abundant with up to 60 000 ind. 1-r in the spring plankton of a German fishpond with
many leaves (BICK 1957 , 1958); organically polluted pond in Germany (MIEGEL 1982); dominant (up to 74 Vo)
in the water column of a ricefield in Italy during summer (MADONI 1996); very abundant in the spring plankton
of the Danube River floodplain in Hungary and Austria (BERECZKY 199 I , STARMÜUINUR et al. 1912); with
low abundance in oligotrophic and eutrophic Polish reservoirs (KLIMOWICZ 1979, }I4LECZKO 1965); during
spring dominant in a Lemna pond in Poland, together with -+ C. nolandi (LEGNER 1964); abundant in Russian
hatchery ponds (KORNIYENKO l91O); Lake Cis6, Spain (JÜRGENS et al. 1994a, PEDRÖS-ALIÖ & GUER-
RERO 1993); oligotrophic and eutrophic lakes in Switzerland (BRUTSCHY 1922, BÜRGI et al. 1985); in the
epilimnion, and up to 64 ind. cm-2 in the water-mud interface of an oligotrophic, warm-monomictic lake in Israel
(MADONI 1990); up to 100000 ind. ml-r at l'7-19" C in the littoral of Lake Baikal during late July (GAJEWS-
KAJA 1933); oligo-, meso-, eu-, and hypertrophic lakes, but not in acidic oligotrophic lakes, of Florida, USA
(BEAVER & CRISMAN 1989a); with an annual mean of 12.1 mg dry mass m-3 in a mesotrophic clearwater lake
of Florida (BEAVER & CRISMAN 1990); tundra pools in Alaska, USA (SULLMN 1957); in a eutrophic res-
ervoir in Brazil throughout the year with a maximum (1200 ind.l-') in December (BARBIERI & GODINHO
ORLANDI 1989a); 13 ind. cm-3 in the profundal (29 m) of an Italian reservoir in December (MADONI 1989);
very abundant in a l3-week-old plant infusion (together with Spirostomum ambiguum) and in the sediment of
fertilized fishponds in Poland (GRABACKA 1971,1973, 1977); bogs in France and Switzerland (GROLIERE
1977, MESSIKOMMER 1952); on artificial substrates exposed in a eutrophic pond of the USA (PRATT et al.
1986); phytotelms (MAYER 1938); eutrophic lakes near Mexico City (LUGO et al. 1998).
Records from potamoplankton: mesosaprobic Elbe, Rhine, and Danube Rivers (e.g., CASPERS & SCHULZ
1964, NOLL 1972, BERECZKY & NOSEK 1993);312 ind. l-r in the betamesosaprobic Volga River in summer
(MAMAYEV A 1975); up to 20 000 ind. l-r in an American stream (LACKEY 1942). Compilation of further re-
cords from running waters and sewage treatment plants, see FOISSNER et al. (1994). Coleps hirtus hirtus occurs
also in wells and drinking waters (LIEB et al. 1956, VEJDOVSKY tggZ). Records from saline biotopes (salt
lakes, brackish waters, sea; e.g. BOIKOVA 1984, SANTANGELO & LUCCHESI 1995) are possibly based on
misidentified marine species, because AX & AX (1960) and BICK (1961) found an upper tolerance limit of
3.0-3.5 Voo. Accordingly, PATTERSON et al. (1989) did not mention C. hirtus hirtus in their review of ciliates of
marine sediments. Terrestrial records and resting cysts not reliably documented.
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria, algae, flagellates, ciliates, and even rotifers (ALEKPEROV 1981, DING-
FELDER 1962, KUSANO 1985, KUSANO et al. 198'7, MADONI et al. 1990, MAMAEVA & PAVL'EVA
1974, NISBET 1984; Fig. 8, -+ Table 1), but is also histophagous, that is, feeds on animal (rotifers, crustaceans)
and plant tissue (DRAGESCO 1962, FAURE-r'RgUIer ß50, l96la, GRAY 1943, KALTENBACH 1962,
KRAINER 1988, LÖFFL ATH 1961, NOLAND 1925a). The following ciliates are ingesred: live Glaucoma scin-
214

Prostomatida
tillans and Cinetochilum llrurgaritaceum, live and dead Tetralrymena pyrifurmis,30-50 pm-sized pieces of live,
and whole dead cells of Spirostomum ambiguum, live and dead Blepharisma japonicum, dead Paramecium cau-
datum, P. aurelia, Dileptus anser, Didinium nasutum, Lacrymaria olor, and also dead individuals of own spe-
cies (FALKNER 1951, SERAVIN & ORLOVSKAJA 1977). MASSANA & PEDRÖS-ALIö 0994) estimated
an uptake rate of 0.5 Cryptomonas ciliate-t h-r at a food concentration of 4 x 104 cells ml-t; however, MASSANA
etal. (1994) mention a "green C. hirtus" (possibly -+ C. hirtus viridis) from the same lake, indicating that the
grazitg data refer to Coleps hirtus hirtus and/or --> C. hirtus viridis.
Generation time 24-91h (+ Table 1, temperature?). Biomass of 106 specimens: 56 mg (SIME-NGANDO &
HARTMANN 1991; fixed cells and possibly confused with other species), 21mg (DILLON & HOBBS 1973,
FOISSNER et al.1994),13-17 mg (BEAVER & CRISMAN 1982, BÜRGI et al. 1985, fixed cells; MICHIELS
1974, NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991, PETROVA & SMIRNOVA 1974). Ecological data of a popula-
tion from a paddy field in Italy + Table2.
Table 1 Fmd seloction mwth nts (u)- doubliru time (DT) md food value in the olmktonic alialß Coleos hirh.s (frm MÄDOM et al- 1 990).
Food source §ingleccll,succesJtotals Totalcallsattime,f Memvalue Growthmte DoublingtimqDT Foodvalue'
(Yo) (^t) sE) pO{)
(x r &)
Bacteria 0/8 0 0 0
C hlo robiu m phaeob acte roi des 4/8 (50) 26 6.5 * 1.04 0.016 44.4 ++
P ro s th e co chl o ri s ae stu arü 7/8 (88) 56 8.0 t 0.79 0.017 40.0 +++
Rho dop s eu do monas p alu stris 1/8 (13) 4 4 0.012 60.0
Thiocaps a roseoper§cina 0/8 0 0 0
11 (unidentified bacteria) 4/8 (so) 45 11.3 t 0.75 0.020 34.4 +++
Iro (unidentified bacteria) 3/8 (38) )) 7.3 r 1.86 0.017 41.7 #
Is (unidentified bacteria) I
Algae 0/8 0 0 0
Botryococcu.r sp. 3/8 (38) 21 7.0 r 1.00 0.016 4.7 ++
C hl a rry do m o n cts gl o e o cy s tifo rmi s 4/8 (so) 53 13.3 t 2.36 0.020 35.0 ++
C hlamy do mo naE vari abilis 2t8 (2s) 23 11.5 *.2.50 0.017 40.8 +
Chlorella vtlgaris 6t8 (7s) 124 20.66 t 1.28 0.024 28.9 +#
Cryptomondrs sp. 6/8 (7s) 65 10.83 t 1.40 0.019 36.8 +r+
Haematococcul sp. 3/8 (38) 32 10.66 * 1.20 0.018 38.9 ++
Pediastrum duplex 4/8 (s0) 128 32.0 x 3.63 0.029 23.9 +++
Pediastntm tetras 0/8 0 0 0
Peridinium cinctum fa. westii 4/8 (so) 36 9.0 t 2.44 0.019 36.9 **
S ce ne desmus qu adi cau da p arvts 2t8 (2s) 8 4.0 * 1.00 0.008 90.8 +
Selenastrum minuhtrn 6/8 (7s) 76 12.7 t 2.01 0.021 32.8 +++
Tetraedron minimum
Control 0/8 0 0
' - no sruvival; * no growth; + good growth; +++ excellent gowtlr"
Tabte 2 Chango in daily biomss @), production @), respiration rate (R) and biomm los @) by Calepr ftirlus population in the e*puimental ricefield from May I 0
to 20. 1983 (fromMADONI 1986).
Time B P R D
d-r mg d.w. ' rn 2 ! 'tr^z J 'rn'z mg d.w. 'm'2
site site site
I 1.1 t9.2
2 3.2 48.6 6; 95; 3; 51; t 6.;
3 6.5 98.8 tt7 1,781 72 1,131 36.4
4 2.5 97.6 102 2,246 65 1,434 116.2
5 0.9 54.6 47 1,861 55 7,224 t32.1
6 0.2 38.9 l3 1,191 9 906 69.1
7 0.0 26.6 2 850 6 543 50.3
I 0.6 <0. I 8 369 2 101 42.2
9 0.5 <0.1 16 2 87 1 0.8
l0 0.3 <0.1 13 <1 6 <1 2.7
ll 0.2 <0.1 7 <1 4 <1 1.0
site A = water column, site B = sediment.
275

Prostomatida
Coleps hirtus hirtus often occurs at very low oxygen tension (BICK 1966, RIGGENBACH 1922, STOUT 1956,
+ Table 3 and -+ Ecograms e, f), occasionally even in anaerobic sediments (WEBB 196l; -+ Ecogram b). It tol-
erares up to 0.1 mg I' NH: f."" ärd up ro I mg l-1 HzS (BICK 1957); SHCHERBAKOV (1969) foand C. hirtus
hirtus in the pelagial of a eutrophic lake even at 10 mg 1-' HrS. KOVALCHUK (1982) observed it together with
metopids, and LAUTERBORN (1916) found it to be common above the sapropel; LIEBMANN (1962), however
states that low oxygen levels are avoided. BICK (1966) explained these different views by assuming that, in or-
ganically polluted waters, a high NH+ and not a low oxygen content is responsible for the lack of C. hirtus hirtus.
Oxygen consumption is 350 pl ind.-' h-r with a biomass of 70 mg for 106 specimens (FENCHEL & FINLAY
1983, KLEKOWSKI 1981), and on average 122 pl Oz ind.-l h-l at 25" C, pH 7 and with a biomass of 88 mg for
106 specimens (SAROJINI & NAGABHUSHANAM 1966,196l); both biomass values, however, indicate that
they were incorrectly calculated or that species were misidentified; they match C. amphacanthus. Coleps hirtus
hirtus prefers temperatures above 10o C (NOLAND 1925); Wper limit is 30' C (BICK & BERTRAM 1973), re-
spectively, 36'C (SCHARF 1961); a fast increase to 40" C is not survived (MOLTMANN 1978). Swims with up
to 690pms-'(BULLINGTON 1925). P:N ratio of excretion products about is 1:5 (BOWNIK-DYLINSKA
1981). Autecological data -> Table 3 and Ecograms c-k.
Table 3: Autecological data of Coleps hirtus hirtus. Column 1, from BICK & KUNZE (1971; summary of data from literature); column 2,
from DETCHEVA (1972, 1976a, 1978, 19'79a, 1983a--c, 1993; many analyses from Bulgarian running waters); column 3, from MIHAI-
LOWITSCH (1989; 15-16 analyses from salrpolluted running waters in Germany); columns 4, 5, from RECK (1987; several analyses from
a eutrophic lake in Germany; column 4 = total range; column 5 = >400 ind. l-r); column 6, from FOISSNER et al. (1994; usually I I analyses
from Upper Austrian running waters).
Parameters References
1 2 aJ 4 5 6
Temperature (" C) 1-30 5-30 4-r8 4.4-9.4 4.4-9.4 3-t3
pH 1.1-9 .5 6.3-8.8 6.1-1 .9 7.3-l .7 7 .4-7 .6 7 .4-8.6
o, (mg l-') 0-3 8 0-r9.4 t.z-tt.3 0.6-7.8 6.0-6.9 8.3-14.2
Oz (saturation 7o) 0-188 5-6 1 46-57 t 9-t t7
BOD5 (mg I') 6-15 0.7-80 1.1->8.6
COz ri". (mg 1-r) 0-140 23-89
NH+*-N (mg 1') 0-20 0.04-38 0.1 1-0.56 0.08-0.35 0. 15-0.35 0-3.95
NO: -N (mg l') 0-10 0.6-6 0.4-r4.2
NOz -N (mg I') 0-0.3 0.01-0.1 0-0.06
Further data: REINNARTH (1979, -+ Ecogram b) found C. hirtus hirtus in the sediment-water interface of a
eutrophic pond in Germany at +1 to -7 cm sediment depth, pH 6.7-8.0, -256 to +397 mV redox potential,
0-14.8 mg l-r NH+*-N, and 0.9-11.3 mg l-' NO: -N. According to BICK & KUNZE (1911), the optimum ranges
are 16J0" C, pH 6.5-7.5,0.I-2.0 mg l-r Oz, 10-15 mg l-r COz r.*, 0.08-0.39 mg l-r NH4*-N, 0-0.05 mg l-1 NH3
r..". Among several variables investigated in the Danube River, only total dissolved solids distinctly increased
population size of C. hirtus äirras (NOSEK & BERECZKY 1994).
Ecological summary: Very likely cosmopolitan. Reliably recorded from a great variety of pelagic and benthic
habitats, except soil, indicating that it cannot make resting cysts. Common throughout the year, with a peak in
spring, and often rather abundant, possibly because it feeds on a great variety of items, including weak or dead
invertebrates. Withstands invertebrate predation better than other ciliates, possibly because of its armour. Prefers
microaerobic conditions and temperatures between 10" C and 20'C, avoids NH+ >0.5mg l-r; oligo- to meso-
stenohaline. Saprobic classification (FOISSNER et al. 1994): alpha- to betamesosaprobic (o = 1 , b = 3 , a = 4, p
=2,1= l,sI=2.7).
276

Prostomatida
5 50
4r5
,.-or
.,,-.+ 4AF
tr €o(ooß\§oo
r,u f O(o.t\t.togt(of,
\E./ o cn 2-t q;O GO .t r. a.t ,; (v! (p (\.
3 300
"l
o
€zg 2,5 \b.q./ 0
-l
20a
c -2
c
1,5 o -3
^A 10f r -1
l- -5
0r5 u_
-b
Mo nnth0 s 51 5 2 205 4+ 2 5 266 537 28 6 39 2 31 70 1 161 21 82 0 I 379-7 d= Ga '! §- §a? 3.q u §? q § q E o g=,o
48 18 =
a
25
20
'[\.
o \
/\.
'-o>o=?:l:r-_.g
35 40 45 50 55 60 mq/l, C02 5 10 15 25 30 3s 40 1s s0 s5 60 ^slt CAz
c d
s5
s0
15
40
I: 0 ,g/t
35 Il [I ,, 00 ,6'l * 105
- "
30
25
20
15
,/-
10 oltrqt6 ltt 15 tl m{t 02
5 f
e
1231s6? 9 10 11 12 13 1L 15
Ec<rgrams of Colcps ltirtus ltirrus (a, tiom FOISSNER et al. 1994; b, tiorn REINNARTH 1979; c-1, tiom BICK 1966). a: Frequency (o/o)
andaverageestimatedabundance(bars=minimum,maximumaccordingtotheZELINKA&MARVANscale:1,2,3,5,7,9)inthebeta-to
alphamesosaprobic Amper River and Vils River in Bavaria during the years 1987-1991. The average abundance (line) was calculated from
the estimated abundance per record. n = number of samples per month. b: Vertical distribution in a eutrophic pond (Heinrichsweiher) in
Bonn, Germany. The numbers at the top of the illustration are abundances (ind. cm'; sum of all layers), and the full width of a field corre-
sponds to IOO Vo of all layers investigated (0 cm = sediment surface). c, e: Number of records (thick line; 68 and 154 records) in the COz
and 02 spectrum, and distribution of all observed values lthin lines; 590 and 914 observations). Frequencies in Vo aboye class centre. The
data are from microcosms polluted with various organic substances (sewage, peptone, glucose, cellulose) and were performed in 3Olitre ba-
sins at 20-22o C and 3500 lx (12 h day). d, f: Quantitative distribution in the COz and Oz spectrum.
277

Prostom atida
r\.
v\
\"--
40
3
35
lnd ividue n
30
25 ?0 000
20
15 000
10 000
5 000
10 12 1L t6 18 20 22mgftruHa
ö-o-.o-.
O-T- .-?Of 678I e PHt, t- -- t f - t-O-, ,
L
h
f: 0
I[:0.1-0,5
II [II : : 0 1, ,6 'l- - 1 2
g
4 zso/nt
lC lt la,tlt Nlt*
'/- j
;il^f
20
Ecograms of Coleps hirtus hirtus (g-k, tiom BICK t 966). The data are tiom microcosms polluted with various organic substances (sewage,
peptone, glucose, cellulose) and were performed in 3O-litre basins at 2C-:22 C and 3500 lx (12 h day). g, i: Number of records (thick lines;
144 and lLO records) in the pH and NH+ spectrum, and distribution of all observed values (thin lines; 1789 and 640 observations). Frequen-
cies in Vo above class centre. h, j, k: Quantitative distribution in the pH and NHr spectrum.
278

Prostomatida
SP\ ,,
, _oB
AMP- ,
,
l
,
,?t'4.
tcR
PCP
CV-
'ryN
cA-
P,T
I
..rrr'
2\ ,-,
{/ -r2l
\x .',"",'.'.
\
2rrr,
.", ,a,Y
\}
""*
"
6
Coleps hirtus hirtus (1,3-1,from FOISSNER 1984;2, from KAHL 1930. 14, in vivo; 5*7, protargol impregnation). 1,2: Representative
specimens, 50 pm, 60 pm. 3: Anterior main plate, bar = 8 pm. Arrow marks ridge at left margin, which is finely crenellated, but not wing-
like as in --> C . spetai. Arrowheads denote teeth of right plate margin altemately arranged to windows (difference to --> C . nolandi). 4: Bulky
specimen with large food vacuoles. 5-7: Ciliary pattem of dorsal and ventral side, 36 pm, bar in (6) = 8 }rm. Arrows mark the three tiny ado-
ral organelles, which interrupt the circular undulating membrane. The basal bodies of the ciliary rows are associated with a parasomal sac
(smaller granule). ACP = anterior collateral plates, AMP = anterior main plates, C = cilium, CA = caudal cilium, CR = ciliary rows, CV =
contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuole, MA = macronucleus, OB = oral basket, PCP = posterior collateral plates, PMP = posterior main
plates, PT = pectinelles (two narrowly spaced dikinetids at anterior end ofciliary rows), SP = spines, UM = undulating membrane composed
of basal body pairs, W = windows.
279

Prostom atida
ffi_ACP
-AM P
_PMP
iii
\lrl ilri
10
ä
u1;;;;.1.::.'f l §a.Ti.
i':";ttitltt:t.litttti.;ttli$W.#fi!:t::',ti::t:) jt;t::t:,t':'
',4 15
Coleps hirtus hirtus (8, fiom DOFLEIN 1909;9, fiom DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-«E,RNE,IS l9it6; 10, il, fiom CHARDEZ 1976;
14-16, originals from Ager River in Upper Austria. 8, 10, 1 1, in vivo; 9, 14-16, protargol impregnation). 8: Four specimens swallowing an-
other ciliate with widely opened mouth. 9: Anterior end showing cytopharynx and extrusomes; both are difficult to recognize in live cells.
10: One row of plates; the circumoral plate is omitted. 11: Just divided cell. The posterior, respectively, anterior body half is brighter be-
cause the new armour plates are colourless and transparent. 14: Optical section showing nuclear apparatus and extrusomes (toxicysts) in and
around cytopharynx. 15, 16a, b: Ciliary pattem ofdorsal and ventral side. Arrows mark the tiny adoral organelles, arrowheads denote diki-
netids of undulating membrane. ACP = anterior collateral plates, ANiP = anterior main plates, C = cilium, CA = caudal citium, CAp = circu-
manal plates, E = extrusomes (toxicysts), MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, OB = oral basket, PCP = posterior collateral plates, pMp
= posterior main plates, PI = pectinelles, T = teeth of plate. Coleps hirtus var. minor (12, from KAHL 1930),40 pm, has transomless win-
dows and' coleps bicuspis (13, from NOLAND 1925a), 55 trrm, has only 2 spines (arrows) at rear end.
280



Prostomatida
äß
'ffiffi
ffis
Coleps hirtus hirtus (front FOISSNER et al. 1994. Scanning electron rnicrographs). 23,24: Latera,l view of the arnroul of a slender and a
broad specimen. The armour is covered by the cell membrane, which has been destroyed by the preparation procedure. Al1 anterior collateral
plates have a minute spine (arrows in 23) causing the serrated anterior end (cp. Fig. 1, 9). One ventral anterior collateral plate has a second
spine (arrowhead), which is easily recognizable in the light microscope due to its considerable size. The anal plates give rise to 3 or 4 spines,
two of which are very prominent (Fig. 26). The pretzel-shaped windows appear as finely dotted domes. Cilia project, in live cells, from the
fusiform openings along abutting plate rows. 25r 262 Anterior and posterior polar view of specimens with I 6 plates per ring and thus 16 cili-
ary rows. The circumoral plates are radially arranged around the oral overture and can be opened for feeding like the aperture of a camera
(Fig. 8). The anal plates give rise to 3 or 4 spines (anows), two of which are very prominent. ACP = anterior collateral plates, AMP = ante-
rior main plates, CPL = circumoral plates, PCP = posterior collateral plates, PMP = posterior main plates, SP = spines, W = windows.
282

Prostomatida
Coleps hirtus hirtus (from FOISSNER et al. 1994. Scanning electron micrographs). 27,28: Anterior end in oblique and lateral view. Note
the radially arranged circumoral plates, which spread during feeding and are enlarged at the adoral organelles (arrow). The spines of the an-
terior collateral plates form a delicate corona. Arrowhead marks the finely crenellated ridge of a collateral plate. 29: Posterior end of armour.
Three large (small arrows) and several small (arrowheads) spines are recognizable. Large arrow denotes the opening for the caudal cilium.
30r 31: Details from main plates. Arrowhead marks ridge at left plate margin. Arrows mark fusiform openings for cilia. The windows are
formed by a fine, convex sieve reinforced in the middle, producing the typical 8-shaped appearance. ACP = anterior collateral plates, AMP =
anterior main plates, CPL = circumoral plates, OO = oral opening, W = windows.
283

Prostomatida
Coleps hirtus subspecies viridis EHRENBERG, 183r nov. stat.
l83l Coleps viridis EHRENBERG, Abh. dt. Akad. Wiss., year 1831: 101 (description without illustration).
1838 Coleps viridis - EHRENBERG, Infusionsthierchen, p. 318 (illustrated description and revision).
1983 Coleps hirtus - CHRISTOPHER & PATTERSON, Annls Stn limnol. Besse, 17: 278 (details on symbiosis).
1984 Coleps sp. - KLAVENESS, Protistologica,2O:335 (ultrastructure and ecology).
1990 Coleps hirtus - HAUCK, Mikrokosmos,19:72 (micrographs and details on symbionts).
Taxonomy
Previously we assigned records of green Coleps hirtus popüations to -s C. spetai (FOISSNER et al. 1994), an-
other symbiotic algae bearing species. A detailed reinvestigation of a green C. hirtus population did not show
any significant morphological differences to aposymbiotic C. hirtus populations. The "green C. hirtus" is very
likely C. viridis of EHRENBERG, which was synonymized with C. hirtus by KAHL (1930). However, symbi-
otic and aposymbiotic populations have a different physiology and ecology, suggesting that they should be con-
sidered as subspecies. Furthermore, the symbiosis is rather stable (-+ autecology section).
Differential diagnosis and similar species
Size (40-50 x 25-35prl, n = 4, original data. in vivo), shape, armour, macronucleus, contractile vacuole, and so-
matic and oral ciliary pattem as in -+ Coleps hirtus hirtus (Fig. 1-17 and Fig. 8 on p. 4); we thus omit a detailed
characterization and line drawings. The only difference is the occurrence of symbiotic green algae (few to many,
occasionally even lacking, 5-6 pm across, without eyespot), which should not be confused with ingested green
algae. -+ Coleps spetai is also green due to symbiotic algae, but its main plates have wing-like ridges (Fig. l, 7,
13 by -+ C. spetai; however, C. hirtus viridis may sometimes also have rather distinct wings!), and, most impor-
tant, each anterior main plate has 5 windows (against 4 in C. hirtus viridis and C. hirtus hirtus). Four windows in
each anterior main plate (character 2) and the symbiotic green algae (character 5) are thus key characters for
identification.
Ecology
This chapter includes, besides a few reliable records of C. hirtus viridis, also some data on "green C. hirtus"
populations lumped with -+ C. spetai by FOISSNER et al. (1994).
Occurrence and distribution: Common in lake plankton, rare in running waters. The locus classicus is in
Berlin, Germany, where EHRENBERG (1831, 1838) discovered C. hirtus viridisbetween filamentous green al-
gae; he found it also in the Ural and Altai region. Records substantiated by micrographs: epilimnion of two Nor-
wegian lakes with 27-521tgl-rtotal phosphorus and 600-16001rgl'total nitrogen during summer (KLAVE-
NESS 1984); pond near Bristol, England, in June (CHRISTOPHER & PATTERSON 1983); Germany (HAUCK
1990). We found C. hirtus viridis in the Höglwörther See (Fig. a-fi), a eutrophic lake in Bavaria, mainly during
summer, and in the Amper River, the outflow of the Ammersee, a mesotrophic lake in Bavaria (Fig. 1-3).
Further records of C. hirtus viridis not substantiated by illustrations or micrographs: abundant in ponds with fila-
mentous green algae in Vienna, Austria, throughout the year (FALKNER 1951); Großer Plöner See, a lake in
northern Germany (ZACHARIAS 1893, 1894); sporadically in Swiss lakes (AMBERG 1903, THOMAS 1964,
VIRIEUX 1916). Records of "green Coleps hirtus"i lakes in Lower Austria, Germany, and France (GEITLER
1947, LE ROUX l9O'7, ZACHARIAS 1902); abundant in the hypolimnion of Priest Pot, a eutrophic pond in
England (GUHL et al. 1994); in all depths (G-25 m) and at 0-12 mg l-r Oz, with a peak in the metalimnion (up to
L4 265 ind. I r), in a eutrophic lake in Germany, especially during summer (MEIER & RECK 1994; identified as
C. nolandi with zoochlorellae, different species?); up to 3000ind.ml-1 at 1m depth in a small holomictic karst
284







Prostomatida
Coleps spetai ForssNER, 1984
1984 Coleps sperai FOISSNER, Stapfia,12:21.
1994 Coleps spelai FOISSNER, 1984 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer.
Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, U94: 400 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Ditterent ial diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 50-70 x 35-55 pm.
2) Body covered in calcified armoured plates, barrel-shaped (Fig. l, 4,7 , 12). Armour consisting of 6 plate rings
(from anterior): circumoral plates, anterior collateral and main plates, posterior main and collateral plates, and
circumanal plates. Each ring composed of 16-18, usually 17 plates. Anterior collateral armour plates with 2,
anterior main plates with 5, posterior main plates with 4, and posterior collateral plates with 2-3 windows, in
total thus 13 or 14 windows per plate row (Fig. 1,2, 12, 14-19). Windows pretze\ (= 8) shaped, ridge at left
plate margin distinctly crenellated and wing-like, teeth of right plate margin alternately arranged to windows
(Fig. 2,1 , 10, 12, 15, l1). One large spine at an anterior collateral plate and four prominent spines at rear end
(Fig. 1, 4, 12-19).
3) Macronucleus globular, eccentric near mid-body (Fig. 1, 5, 11a).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end (Fig. 1).
5) Extrusomes (toxicysts) difficult to recognize in vivo. Cells green due to hundreds symbiotic algag 3-6 pm
across (Fig. 4,1,8,11a, b).
6) 16-18, usually 17 meridional ciliary rows each with 4 condensed cilia (pectinelles) at anterior end; cilia pro-
ject from small, fusiform orifices between arnour plates. 1 distinctly elongated caudal cilium (Fig. 1,5,6, 13,
t4).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous. Undulating membrane circular, composed of
paired basal bodies, interrupted by three tiny adoral organelles (Fig. 6, 1 la, 15, 16; details of oral ciliature
only recognizable after silver impregnation, not necessary for identification).
8) Movement without peculiarities, swims moderately rapidly.
Similar species
-+ Coleps hirtus viridis, which is also green due to symbiotic algae, has only 4 windows in the anterior main
plates (C. spetai invariably has 5!); furthermore, it is slightly smaller, usually less bulky, and the ridge at the left
main plate margin is hardly as distinctly wing-like as in C. spetai. Other species lack zoochlorellae.2 (five win-
dows in anterior main plates, windows 8-shaped) and 5 (symbiotic green algae present) are key characters for
identification.
Ecology
Previously we put some records of green, that is, zoochlorellae-bearing --> Coleps hirtus to C. spetai (FOISS-
NER et al. 1994). Here we assign these to the resurrected -+ Coleps hirtus viridis, although it cannot be excluded
that some of them belong to Coleps spetai.
Occurrence and distribution: Possibly common in lakes and lake outflows. Locus classicus is a hypertrophic
lake (Obertrumer See) in Salzburg, Aus1ria, where FOISSNER (1984) discovered C. spetai during a bloom of
Oscillatoria rubescens in mid-August; it was so abundant that the water was green and bathing people felt wor-
ried. Further records: Amper River, the outflow of Lake Ammersee, Bavaria, mainly during the warm season
(FOISSNER et al. 1994); Piburger See, an oligo- to mesotrophic lake in Tyrol, Austria 1§nr4Ef et al. 1996; bio-
288

Prostomatida
mass data, however, indicate misidentification, see autecological data); pelagial of excavated groundwater ponds
in Styria, Austria (KRAINER 1988); small, meromictic lake in Upper Austria (NAUWERCK 1996); with less
than 1000 ind. 1-r in a shallow, mesotrophic alkaline lake (Neusiedler See) in Austria, and up to 10 000 ind. I I
(34 oÄ of total ciliate biomass) in a mesotrophic, alkaline (pH 8.2-9.2), reedless brown-water pond near this lake
during midsummer (SCHÖNBERGER 1994, 1994a).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Mixotrophic; feeds on Ceratium cornutum and Aphanizomemon
flos-aquae (FOISSNER 1984) and freshly died metazooplankton, especially Diaphanosomc (SCHÖNBERGER
1994a). Biomass of 106 specimens about 60 mg (FOISSNER et al.1994), according to §IUBI< et al. (1996) only
3 mg, strongly indicating calculation error or misidentification; thus their grazing data are omitted. Reliably re-
corded from Europe only; possibly more common than indicated by literature data because very likely frequently
not distinguished from -+ C. hirtus. Possibly prefers the warm season. Saprobic classification according to
FOISSNER et al. (1994): betamesosaprobic (o = 2, b = 6, a= 2,I= 3, SI = 2.0).
UM
ACP
AMP
PNl P
o §\
i,q
PCP Y@^ @+ \7SA
rPp§e'
Bffir tltt
l
g,!o@ru/ ,)oo
rQ o;
lrt-,
,
Coleps spetai (1-6, fiom FOISSNER 1984. l-4, tn vivo; 5,6, protargol im- CR
pregnation). 1, 2: Slender specimen,50-J0 1rrn long. Arrowheads mark dis-
a
tinctly crenellated and wing-like broadened ridges of main plates, shown at tllei
higher magnification in Figure 2 (anterior main plate with five windows, bar ta.tJ t'
t8 o p tm he) . w 3 in: gIn -l ip keo la rir d v gi ee sw o, fC th. es p met aa ini lo po lak tes s l .i k 4e : Bth re o ab dla d se p eo cf im a e c ni .r c Ou nla lyr s sa ow m ed u oe f 'r,-=i*""J t* $ni I ,r "' , }e . .o ' ..
the numerous symbiotic green algae are shown. 5: Ciliary pattern of right t
side, 50 pm. 6: Ciliary pattern of anterior end. Arrow marks tiny adoral or- . , ..ll.t ..
ganelles interrupting circular undulating membrane composed of paired ba- ' l',.;;!1;tlb;: ..
' ,.."a.lt""to
sal bodies. ACP = anterior collateral plates, AMP = anterior main plates, AO .' 1
= adoral organelles, C = cilium, CA = caudal cilium, CR = ciliary rows, FV
= food vacuole, MA = macronucleus, OB = oral basket, PCP = posterior col- 'l'i ' lr 1 t
lateral plates, PMP = posterior main plates, PT = pectinelles (narrowly ,traI I
spaced basal bodies at anterior end of ciliary rows), SA = symbiotic green PT r§
algae, SP = spines, T = tooth, UM = undulating membrane, W - window. O2
289

Prostomatida
Coleps spetai (7-10, I lb-l-1, tiont FOISSNER et al. 199.{; I la, original. 7-9, I lb, in vivo interl'erence contrast rricrographs; 10, in vivo
bright field micrograph; 1 la, protargol impregnation; I 2, 13, scanning electron micrographs). 7, 8: Total view and detail of a representative
specimen. Arrows mark wing-like and distinctly crenellated ridges of main plates. The cytoplasm is packed with symbiotic green algae (ar-
rowheads). 9n L0: Main plates. Arrowhead in (10) marks a ridge; arrows denote teeth of right plate side, which altemate with the 8-shaped
windows. 11a, b: Symbiotic green algae (SA) after silver impregnation and in live cells. 12, 13: Total views of armour. Note large spines at
rear end, the barrel-shaped outline, and the conspicuous "wings" ofthe main plates. In live specimens, cilia project from the fusiform open-
ings along abutting plate rows (arrows). ACP = anterior collateral plate, AMP = anterior main plate, MA = macronucleus, OB = oral basket,
PCP = posterior collateral plate, PMP = posterior main plate, SA = symbiotic green algae, SP = spines, W = windows.
290

Prostom atrda
Coleps spetai (liom FOlSSNER et al. 1994. Scanning electron rnicrographs.). 14: Posteriol end showing -3 large ar.rd -j small spines. The
ridges are distinctly crenellated. 15, 160 18: Anterior end. Arrow in (16) denotes enlarged circumoral plates between the tiny adoral organ-
elles; at this site, one anterior collateral plate has a prominent spine (arrowhead). Note wingJike, distinctly crenellated ridge of main plates.
17: Anterior and posterior main plates abut in mid-body, where the wing-like broadening of the ridges is most distinct. 19: Rear end with an
orifice (arrow) either for the caudal cilium or the contractile vacuole pore. ACP = anterior collateral plates, AMP = anterior main plates, CPL
= circumoral plates, PMP = posterior main plates, SP = spine.
29t

7
Prostomatida
Coleps elongatus EHRENBERG, 1831
1830 Coleps elongatus - EHRENBERG, Abh. dt. Akad. Wiss., year L83O: 42 (nomen nudum, that is, without
description and illustration).
1831 Coleps elongatus EHRENBERG - EHRENBERG, Abh. dt. Akad. Wiss., year 1 83 1 : 101 (description
without illustration).
1838 Coleps elongatus - EHRENBERG, Infusionsthierchen, p. 318 (illustrated description and revision).
1925 Coleps elongatus EHRENBERG 1830 - NOLAND, Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 44: 7 (revision).
l93O Coleps elongatus EHRB., 1830 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 134 (revision; authoritative redescription).
Taxonomy
SMALL & LYNN (1985, p. 465;Fig.4) described aC. elongatus from the USA with only 3 windows (cilia) in
the main plates and the adoral organelles (brosse files) perpendicularly arranged to the ciliary rows. This unusual
morphology indicates a different species or misobservation; furthermore, SMALL & LYNN misinterpreted the
parasomal sac as a second basal body. Unfortunately, they used this doubtful data to separate --> Coleps nolandi
as a new genus (Nolandia; adoral organelles parallel to ciliary rows, which consist of monokinetids) from the re-
maining Coleps species ("brosse files perpendicular to body kineties, which consist of dikinetids"). However, ac-
cording to our and other data (e.g., HUTTENLAUCH 1986), Coleps species with 8-shaped windows (for exam-
ple, C. elongatus, -+ C. hirtus, --> C. spetai, C. amphacanthus) ard -+ C. nolandi are identical in these
characters, that is, the adoral organelles are longitudinally arranged and the ciliary rows consist, except
anteriorly, of monokinetids. Thus, we do not accept Nolandia as defined by SMALL & LYNN (1985): A much
better character would be the special plate type, that is, the reniform, undivided windows.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 60-80 x 25-30 pm.
2) Body covered in calcified armoured plates, usually cylindrical, rarely barrel-shaped (Fig. 3, 5,9,24,25). At-
mour consisting of 6 plate rings (from anterior): circumoral plates, anterior collateral and main plates, poste-
rior main and collateral plates, and circumanal plates. Each ring composed of 14-18, usually 16 plates. Col-
lateral armour plates each with 2, artterior main plates with 5, and posterior main plates with 4 windows, in
total thus 13 windows per plate row (Fig. ,,19,24-27). Windows pretzel (= 8) shaped, ridge at left plate
margin almost smooth, never wing-like as in -+ C. §petai, teeth of right plate margin alternately arranged to
windows (Fig.2, l82l). One large spine at an anterior collateral plate and usually three prominent spines at
rear end (Fig. 3, 8,22,25J7)
3) Macronucleus globular, slightly below mid-body (Fig. 6,14).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end (Fig. 7).
5) Extrusomes (toxicysts) about 5 pm long, slightly curved, difficult to recognize in vivo (Fig. 6). Cells, espe-
cially armour, light brown (Fig. 9). No symbiotic green algae.
6) 14-18, usually 16 meridional ciliary rows, each with four condensed cilia (pectinelles) at anterior end; cilia
project from small, fusiform orifices between armour plates (Fig. 14, 17 , 23, 24). Two distinctly elongated
(20 pm) caudal cilia (Fig. 3, 7), which are difficult to identify in silver nitrate preparations because there are
usually several argyrophilic granules on the posterior pole area (Fig. 1 1-13).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous. Undulating membrane circular, composed of
paired basal bodies, interrupted by three tiny adoral organelles composed of about four dikinetids each (Fig.
6, 15-17 ,23,26; details of oral ciliature only recognizable after silver impregnation, not necessary for identi
fication).
8) Movement without peculiarities, swims rapidly to and fro.
292

Prostomatida
Similar species
The following species have the same type of armour plates: -+ Coleps hirtus hirtus (very similar at superficial
observation, but distinct by having only 1 caudal cilium and only 4 windows in the anterior main plates), C. am-
phacanthus EHRENBERG (up to 90 pm long, several caudal cilia, up to 7 windows in anterior main plates, bur-
siform; Fig. 9 by -+ C. nolqndi), -+ C. spetai (with symbiotic green algae, 1 caudal cilium), --> C . hirtus viridis
(with symbiotic green algae, 1 caudal cilium, 4 windows in anterior main plates), C. bicuspis NOLAND (1 cau-
dal cilium, only 2 spines at rear end). -+ Coleps nolandi has a single caudal cilium and armour plates with reni-
form windows. 2 (five windows in anterior main plates, windows 8-shaped), 5 (no symbiotic green algae), 6 (two
caudal cilia) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Less common than -+ C. hirtus, benthic and pelagic. The locus classicus is in
Berlin, Germany, where EHRENBERG (1838) discovered C. elongatus between algae in summer. KAHL (1930)
observed it in Germany (near Hamburg?) "nicht selten (= frequently)" between Utricularia, especially during In-
dian summer. We found C. elongatus in the hypertrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria, in mature acti-
vated sludge of a pilot sewage treatment plant in Sweden (LEE 1996, LEE & WELANDER 1996), and in a
dammed river at Praia do Forte, Brazil. NOLAND (1925a) recorded it from the USA, likely Wisconsin.
Records from stagnant waters not substantiated by illustrations: Lake Como, Italy (CATTANEO 1882); Lake Se-
van and water reservoir in Armenia (AMBARTZUMYAN 1962,Z}{AR.IKOV 1983); dominant in the pelagial of
five reservoirs of the Moscow River supply sys-
tem, Russia (BELOVA 1989, ß9$; Lake
Dzhandar, USSR (ALIEV 1988); Reelfoot Lake,
USA (BEVEL 1938); Douglas Lake, Michigan,
USA, at 24" C and pH 7.0 in mid-August
C_
(cArRNS & YONGUE 1966).
T.
Autecological data: Feeds on heterotrophic flag-
Iti)1
ellates (our observations) and ciliates (Vorticella;
NOLAND I925a), but probably omnivorous like ijAi
other Coleps species. Biomass of 106 specimens i
15 mg (SKIBBE l99l1' rather small value indi-
cating misidentification or strong shrinkage) to
about 45 mg (our calculations). SKIBBE (1991)
found Coleps cf . elongatus in a hypertrophic lake
(Heiligensee) in Germany at 5.9-2I.2" C, pH 6.9
to 8.8, <189 Vo Oz-saturatiotr, (13.4 mg l-t NH+*-
N, <0.1 16 mg l-t NOz -N, 0.31 mg l-t NO:--N,
<1.94 mg l-t soluble reactive phosphorus. BELO- \
l7
VA (1989) observed C. elongatus at 15.6" C. SP
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from
Coleps elongatus (1, fiorn NOLAND 1925a;2,3, fiom KAHL 1930;4,
Eurasia and South America. Probably more com- from SMALL & LYNN 1985. 1-3, in vivo; 4, protargol impregnation).
mon than indicated by literature data because 1: NOLAND's illustration is rather superficial and does not show the
very likely often confused with the more com- main characters, viz., window number and caudal cilia, 40-55 pm. 2:
mon + C. hirtus hirtus. Benthic and pelagic and Detail of armour plate. 3: Lateral view of a representative specimen,
probably euryoecious like most (a11?) Coleps 70 pm. 4: The American population (Greenbelt, Maryland) has only 3
cilia (arrowheads), that is, windows in the main plates, indicating mis-
species because of omnivory. identification or misobservation (see taxonomy for details), 53 pm. AO
= adoral organelles (oriented perpendicularly to ciliary rows, which is
very likely a misobservation), C = cilium, CA = caudal cilia, SP =
spines, T = tooth, W = window.
293

Prostom atrda
PT
CR *
W
ffiiiwt{,
tW./!iT ttti::. I jjtt:l
*,.lli ''rd1,..r,,.. ' ,\, :!;i.l::tl,
14
UM
15
io,,,,'N,t,,gg;i1ll:llttt!;;Nj , '..,., I , ,,: tlir ir f.r .,t u
Coleps elongatus (originals. 5-9, in vivo; l0-13, Chanon-LwotT silver nitrate impregnation; l4-17, silver carbonate irnpregnatior.r).5-9:
Slender and broad specimens at different focal planes. Note that C. elongatus has five windows in each anterior main plate and two caudal
cilia versus four windows and one caudal cilium in -» C. hirtusl Arrow in (6) marks oral basket containing 5 pm long toxicysts (anowhead).
10-17: Ciliary pattem ofanterior (10, 15-17) and posterior (11-13) polar area and total view (14). Arrowheads in (14) mark cilia in the an-
terior main plates, arrowheads in (15) denote the tiny, meridional orientated arranged adoral organelles. ACP = anterior collateral plates,
AMP=anteriormainplates,CA=caudalcilia,CR=ciliaryrows,CV=contmctilevacuole,E=extrusomes,EP=excretorypore,MA=
macronucleus, OB = oral basket, PCP - posterior collateral plates, PMP = posterior main plates, pf = pectinelles (two closely spaced basal
body pairs at anterior end of ciliary rows which consist of single basal bodies), SP = spines, UM = undulating membrane.
294

Prostomatida
Coleps elongatus (originals. ltJ,2l, in vivo; 19, 2O,)2,23, scanning electron micl'ographs). 18,21: Squeezed specinrens to show maitr aud
collateral armour plates. Coleps elongatus has 5 windows (arrowheads) in each anterior main plate. 19: Two main plates showing sievelike
windows, fusiform openings for cilia, and smooth ridge (arrow) close to left plate margin. 20r 22: Anteior and posterior end in lateral view.
23: Frontal view of a specimen with 16 plates per ring. Arrow marks plate ridge, arrowhead denotes modified circumoral plates at adoral or-
ganelles. ACP, AMP = anterior collateral and main plates, SP = spines, T = teeth, W = window.
295

Prostomatida
AGFq
AMF*-
*
|{j
4
4
.*
ffi
Coleps elongatus (original scanning electron micrographs). 24r25l. Broad and slender specimen. Arrowheads in (24) mark the tive windows
of an anterior main plate, an important character of C. elongatus. In live cells, cilia project from the fusiform openings along abutting plate
rows. 26: Oblique frontal view. Arrows mark rather smooth ridge near left plate margin, arrowhead denotes an enlarged circumoral plate at
the adoral organelles. 27: Posterior polar view showing 3 prominent spines (arrowheads). ACP = anterior collateral plates, AMP = anterior
main plates, CPL = circumoral plates, PCP = posterior collateral plates, PMP = posterior main plates, SP = spines.
296

Prostomatida
Coleps nolandi KAHL, 1e3o
1930 Coleps nolandi KAHL, Arch. Protistenk.,T0:342.
1930 Coleps nolandi KAHL, 1930 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 135 (revision).
1976 Coleps nolandi KAHL, 1930 - WILBERT & SCHMALL, Protistologica, L2:194 (redescription from life
and after silver impregnation).
1994 Coleps nolandi KAHL, 1930 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer.
Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll94: 395 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecological mono-
Craph).
Taxonomy
SMALL & LYNN (1985, p. 465) established the gents Nolandia for this species because they misinterpreted the
brosse structure and somatic infraciliature of -+ C. elongatus, where this matter is discussed in detail.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 40-65 x18-25 pm.
2) Body covered in calcified armoured plates, cylindrical, rarely barrel-shaped (Fig. l, 12). Armour consisting
of 6 plate rings (from anterior): circumoral plates, anterior collateral and main plates, posterior main and col-
lateral plates, and circumanal plates. Each ring composed with 12-14, usually 13 plates. Number of windows
highly variably, that is, from 5 complete plus 6 half windows to 10 complete plus 6 half windows per row
(Fig. 1, 4, 5,6,12). Windows reniform, ridge of plates rather distant from smooth left margin, teeth of right
plate margin at levels of windows (Pig.2,8, l4). Usually three small spines at rear end (Fig. 1, 4, l5).
3) Macronucleus globular, slightly behind mid-body (Fig. a).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end (Fig. 4).
s) Extrusomes (toxicysts) difficult to recognize in vivo. Cells, especially armour, usually yellowish to brownish.
No symbiotic green algae.
6) 12-14, usually 13 meridional ciliary rows, each with fourcondensed cilia (pectinelles) at anteriorend; cilia
project from small, fusiform orifices between armour plates. One distinctly elongated caudal cilium (Fig. 3, 4,
7a, 12).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous. Undulating membrane circular, composed of
paired basal bodies, intemrpted by three tiny adoral organelles (Fig. 3, 7a,b, 13; details of oral ciliature only
recognizable after silver impregnation, not necessary for identification).
8) Movement without peculiarities, swims moderately rapidly.
Similar species
Differs from all other Coleps species by the reniform plate windows. Usually, it has smaller posterior spines and
is more slender than the most common species, -+ C . hirtus hirtus. 2 (windows reniform) is the key character for
identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Not separated from -+ C. hirtus before 1930. Common throughout the year in the
benthal and pelagial of stagnant and running waters. Often associated with -+ C. hirtus, but very likely less com-
mon, at least in lakes. The locus classicus is possibly near Hamburg, Germany, where KAHL lived and worked;
he found C. nolandi in the mud of clean waters, especially among Utricularia.
291

Prostomatida
Records (mainly benthic) from ponds and lakes and slowly running waters: oligosaprobic, betamesosaprobic, and
dystrophic ponds in the Austrian Alps (FOISSNER 1980b, FOISSNER & ADAM 1979); mud of the hypertro-
phic pond at Salzburg University (BLATTERER 1989); pelagial of excavated ponds in Styria, Austria (KRAI-
NER 1988); >1000 ind. cm-2 in the pseudoperiphyton, but not in the pelagial, of a eutrophic pond in Bonn, Ger-
many, during spring (SONG & WILBERT 1989, WILBERT 1969, WILBERT & SCHMALL 1976); beta- to al-
phamesosaprobic areas of the Hamburg Harbour, Germany (HECKMAN et al. 1990); in a Lemna pond in
Czechoslovakia, together with the much more abundant --> C. hirtus hirtus (LEGNER 1964). RECK (1987) ob-
served a population with symbiotic algae (identification thus uncertain) in the pelagial of a eutrophic lake in Ger-
I)
many, peakin g (14 265 ind. I at 4 m in early August.
Records from running waters, see FOISSNER et al. 099D; according to PATTERSON et al. (1989) also marine.
Autecological data: Feeds on algae (e.g. Chlorella sp.), ciliates and organic debris (FOISSNER 1980b, HUL
1987, WILBERT & SCHMALL 1976). Biomass of 106 specimens about 16 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1994).
FOISSNER & ADAM (1979) found C. nolandi twice in dystrophic waters at 8-9o C,pH5.2-5.6, 8.3-11.3 mg I'r
O, (97 to 132 7o saturation), 12-54 mg 1-' KMnO4 consumption, 0.008 mg lr NH+*-N , 0-2 mg l-r HzS, 1.3 mg l-r
COz r..", 400 000-700 000 bacteria ml-r.
Ecological summary: Recorded from Eurasia only. Benthic and pelagic. Common during all seasons, at least in
running waters (FOISSNER et al. 1994); holo-euryhaline and probably omnivorous. Saprobic classification ac-
cordingtoFOISSNERetal. (1994): oligosaprobictoalphamesosaprobic(o=3,b=4,a=3,I= 2,SI=2.0).
PL
UM
PT CP
MP
MP
V
MA- CP
ataaa
Coleps nolaudi (1, li'om KAHL l9-30; 24,from WILBERT & SCHMALL 1916; l,2, in vivo; 3, protargol impregnation;4, composite of
life observation and protargol impregnation). 1,4: Lateral views, 50 pm, 40 pm. Figure I shows the typical cylindrical body shape. 2: ll,4ain
plate. Arrow marks ridge, which is rather distant from left plate margin; arrowheads denote teeth at summit of windows. 3: Ciliary pattem of
ventral side. ACP = anterior collateral plates, AMP = anterior main plates, AO = adoral organelles, C = cilium, CA = caudal cilium, CPL =
circumoral plates, CR = ciliary rows, CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus, OB = oral basket, PCP = posterior collateral plates,
PMP = posterior main plates, pT = pectinelles, SP = spines, UM = undulating membrane, W = window.
298



Prostom attda
Coleps nolandi (tiom FOISSNER et al. 1994. Scanning electron micrographs). 12: The armour consists of six plate rings (tiom anterior ro
posterior): circumoral plates (Fig. 13), anterior collateral plates with small spines, anterior and posterior main plates abutting in mid-body,
posterior collateral plates, circumanal plates with three very small spines. Arrows mark openings for cilia. 13: The oral opening is covered
by a ring of circumoral plates. Arrows mark openings for the cilia of the tiny adoral organelles (cp. Fig. 3,7). t4z Ring of anterior main
plates opened. Arrows mark openings for cilia. Black arrowhead denotes ridge, white marks a tooth projecting from the summit of the win-
dow at the right plate margin (cp. Fig. 2). The windows are continuous with the plate surface and thus hardly recognizable. 15: Posterior half
of armour. ACP = anterior collateral plates, AMP = anterior main plates, CPL = circumoral plates, PCP = posterior collateral plates, PMP =
posterior main plates, SP = spine, W = window.
300

Prostomatida
Genus Urotricha cr-apaRsnE & LACHMANN, 1859
A valuable key for urotrichs with three or more caudal cilia has been prepared by FOISSNER & PFISTER (1997).
It is reproduced here, although not all species contained in the key are treated in the book. The new species de-
scribed are also included. Some important morphometric data from urotrichs and related genera with three or more
caudal cilia are summarized in a table on the following page.
1 Marineorbrackish ....2
- Freshwaterorsoil .....3
2
Length 38-53 pm, macronucleus distinctly elongate, 46-56 clliary rows, about 3 caudal cilia, adoral organelle
3 (= brosse row 3) with 8-9 dikinetids (paired basal bodies) . U. cyrtonucleata
- dikinetids
Length 69-80 pm, macronucleus probably ellipsoidal, adoral organelle 3 with 3 U. baltica
3 Soil. Macronucleus distinctly elongate, 30_32 clliary rows, about 13 caudal cilia . U. terricola
- globular .
Freshwater. Macronucleus ellipsoidal or . . . 4
4 .......
Withsomatictrichocysts(extrusomes; observecarefullybecauseinconspicuousinsomespecies!) 5
- Withoutsomatictrichocysts ........14
5 Trichocysts conspicuous, about 5 pm long and + fusiform, produce distinct peripheral fringe. Length of cells
usually50-120pm.. ........
6
-
Trichocysts inconspicuous, usually less than 5 pm long and slender (rod-shaped), do not form distinct periph-
eral fringe. Length ofcells usually 30-50 pm . . . . . . 11
6 Bodylength8G-l20pm.Broadlyellipsoidal .......
7
-
Body length 5O-80 pm. Broadly ellipsoidal or champagne cork shaped, that is, posterior, unciliated portion
proper .
narrowed and set offplug-like from body . . . 8
7
3 conspicuous adoral organelles, each composed of about 15 basal body pairs. About 30 caudal cilia, which
form a ring and originate from distinct cortical protrusions. Movement conspicuous, that is, jumps
Ab;"; iu ;;r;,"ii., i;;;"'pi;;;;' ;;; ro.noo*"o .0, üt ;b"; ;i o{0, 7^?::':§,:t' ?t
'","rr "d*;i '"".', "i
scattered, inconspicuous caudal cilia. Movement inconspicuous, that is, does not jump
8 ;il ;;;j,i;il; ;","n".0*,ä;;;il;;ü;; ;;;;; U. simonsbergeri (p. 324)
(6; conspicuous (1. tricha
- 10-20 caudal cilia forming distinct tuft at posterior end . . . . . 9
9 About 80 ciliary rows. Posterior, unciliated body portion indistinctly set off from body proper. Adoral organ-
elles of same length, each composed of about 10 dikinetids (paired basal bodies) . . U. valida (p. 313)
- 4(H0ciliaryrows. Posterior, unciliatedbodyportionusuallydistinctly setoff frombodyproper ....... 10
l0
42-50 (mean = 46) ciliary rows, 14-18 (mean = 16) caudal cilia, excretory pore of contractile vacuole outside
circle formed by caudal cilia; each adoral organelle consisting of 2-4 dikinetids . . . . . . . U. pelagica (p. 309)
-
5142 (mean = 58) ciliary rows, 12-16 (mean = 13) caudal cilia, excretory pore of contractile vacuole within
circle formed by caudal cilia; each adoral organelle consisting of about 7 dikinetids
. . U. apsheronica (p.302)
11 (5) Body distinctly cylindrical, 3 widely set and obliquely spread caudal cilia . . . . . U. pusilla
- Body ellipsoidal or globular, 4-10 caudal cilia . . . . . 12
12 Two size types of rod-shaped trichocysts, somatic ones about 3 pm long, those in posterior plug about 6 pm
long. About 35-50 ciliary rows . . . . U. castalia (p. 335)
- Trichocysts of same length(2.54.0 pm) throughout. About 28-38 ciliary rows . . . 13
13 5-6 adoral organelles; trichocysts 4 pm long; body shape ellipsoidat . . . U. matthesi matthesi (p. 340)
- 3 adoral organelles; trichocysts 2.5 pm long; body shape conical U. matthesi tristicha (p.342)
L4 (4) Body length <60 pm. 55-60 ciliary rows, 4 minute adoral organelles . . . U. faurei
- Body length about 90 pm . U. multisetosa
Except for the oligotrichs, urotrichs are the most typical and common plankton ciliates. Unfortunately, they are
rather difficult to ident§ because some important characters (e.g. brosse structure, number and arrangement of
301

Prostomatida
caudal cilia) are difficult to recognize in live specimens, even with differential interference contrast. Thus, reliable
identification often needs silver impregnation although some species and/or species groups can be correctly identi-
fied by careful inspection of live cells. We recommend that ecologists use silver carbonate, a fast method that
works well with urotrichs (se, e.g. Fig. 28 by -+ U. apsheronica,Fig. 17,18 by -+ U. castalia). However, it has to
be emphasized that live observation is indispensable in identifying urotrichs because one of the most important
characters, the extrusomes (trichocysts; presence/absence; size and shape), is usually recognizable with sufficient
clarity only in live specimens.
Table: Important morphometrics (arithmetic mean; Min-Max) from urotrichs and related genera with three or more caudal cilia.
Species (References)1 Body, length3 Number of
(pm) ciliary rows caudal cilia adoral organelles
U rotricha apsheronica (l) 48.2; 35-63 5l .7; 5l-62 13.5 ; 12-16 3.0; 3-3
Urotricha pelagica (l) 4l .4; 37 -60 45.9; 42-50 16.0; 14-18 3.0; 3-3
(Jrotricha valida (3) 55.6; 52-63 8 1.0; 16-87 -10-r4 3.0; 3-3
fI rotric ha v enatrix (4) 83.4; 68-1 13 106.5; 98-t27 30.9;21-35 3.0; 3-3
U rotric ha simonsber g eri (1) 90.8; 65-1 10 92.0;13-109 24.6; 18-30 16.2;12-20
Urotricha castalia CP2 ( 1) 29.0; 24-35 31 .6;34-41 6.1; 4-9 3.0; 3-3
Urotricha castalia SP2 ( 1) 32.2;21-33 40.4;35-46 8.8; 8- 1 0 3.0; 3-3
Urotricha matthesi matthesi (2) 28.8; 24-36 31.6; 28-35 3.5; 2-4 5-6
IJrotricha matthesi tristicha (I) 32.4;26-38 31.3; 28-38 1.0; 4--5 3.0; 2-3
Lo n g ifra gma ob liqua (5) 53.4;45-80 12.8; 65-82 -10 3.0; 3-3
Lon gitric ha puytorac i (l) 44.2;36-59 49.2;48-50 lacking 3.0; 3-3
P elagothrix chlorelli gera (1) 41.6; 35-50 )A ). ))_)7 "some" 3-4
L t.2) LL 2I
lReferences:l=FOISSNER&PFISTER(1997),2=KRAINER(1995),3=SONG&WILBERT(1989),4=originaldata,5=FOISSNER
( I 984a).
2 Qp = population from Lake Constance, Germany; §P = poputation from the pond at Salzburg University, Austria.
3 Silver-impregnated specimens.
U rotricha ap sheronica xry«pERov, 1e84
l9l4 Urotricha venatix KAHL, 1935 - DRAGESCO, IFIODE & FRYD-VERSAVEL, Protistologica, l0: 70
(misidentification).
1984 Urotricha apsheronica ALEKPEROY,Zool.Zh.,63:1417 (without live observations).
1997 Urotricha apsheronica ALEKPEROV, 1984 - FOISSNER & PFISTER, Limnologica,2T:329 (revision;
detailed redescription from life and after silver impregnation and scanning electron microscopy).
Taxonomy
ALEKPEROV (1984d) and DRAGESCO et al. (1974) described U. apsheronica rather superficially, that is, without
detailed morphometry and live morphology. FOISSNER & PFISTER (1997) confirmed the main characteristics of the
ALEKPEROV population and redescribed the species (Fig. 1, 12,17-44). For details on synonymy and translation of
the descriptions by ALEKPEROV (1984d) and DRAGESCO et al. (1974), see FOISSNER & PFISTER (1991).
302

Prostomatida
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 40-75 x 30-40 pm, usually about 50-65 pm long.
2) Body barrel-shaped with unciliated posterior portion distinctly narrowed and set off plug-like from body
proper (Fig. 1, 6,31); rarely almost globular, possibly slightly distorted, specimens occur. Shape fragile, that
is, easily becoming globular or irregular in stressed cells (Fig. 17,27).
3) Macronucleus distinctly (about 2:1) ellipsoidal, rarely reniform, eccentric in mid-body (Fig. 1, 14,28).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end, slightly eccentric, with single (very rarely two) excretory pore within cir-
cle formed by caudal cilia (Fig. I , 12, 15 , 22, 24, 35).
s) Extrusomes (2 types) very numerous and clearly recognizable only in live specimens: type I inconspicuous,
2.5-3.0 pm long, slightly fusiform and curved, found exclusively within oral basket (Fig. 1, 2,28); type 2
along ciliary rows produces conspicuous peripheral fringe in live specimens, 4.5-5.0 pm long, fusiform (Fig.
t,2,11,18,28).
6) 5l-62, usually about 58 meridional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by about 20 7o. t2-16 (mean = 13.5) cir-
cularly arranged, elongated caudal cilia (Fig. l,ll-13,15,11,22,24,2129,32,35,31).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous in vivo. Undulating membrane circular, consists
of short, paired cilia forming digitate processes (oral flaps) around oral opening. Three serially and obliquely
arranged adoral organelles (brosse) each composed of 6-8 dikinetids (Fig. 1, 4, 5,7 , 10, 11, 13, 19,20,23,25,
30, 31, 4044; further details of oral ciliature, described in the figure explanations and in FOISSNER & PFIS-
TER 1997, recognizable only after silver impregnation and not necessa-ry for identification).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of fast forward swimming interrupted by wide jumps at irregular inter-
vals.
Similar species
Easily confused with some other large, distinct trichocysts-bearing urotrichs: Urotricha tricha WANG & NIE,
1933 (usually only 4 caudal cilia), -+ U. valida (unciliated posterior portion not distinctly narrowed, 76-87 clliary
rows),-+ IJ. venatrix (60_120 pm long, unciliated posterior portion not distinctly narrowed, 98-127 ciliary rows,
2l-35 caudal cilia),-t U. pelagica (most similar species! Excretory pore outside of caudal cilia circle, 42-50 clli-
ary rows, 2-4 dikinetids in each adoral organelle). -+ Urotricha castalia, -+ U. matthesi matthesi, and -+ U. mat-
thesi tristicha are smaller (<50 pm) and have rod-shaped, inconspicuous extrusomes. -+ Longitricha puytoraci is
globular and lacks caudal cilia. Longifragma obliqua (KAHL, 1926) FOISSNER, 1984a has a rounded rectangular
outline and a very different brosse (Fig. 7-9 by --> Urotricha venatrix).2 (posterior portion set off), 4 (excretory
pore within circle formed by caudal cilia), 5 (peripheral extrusome fringe), 6 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: In pond and lake plankton. Locus classicus of Urotricha apsheronica is the Djei-
ranbaten reservoir on the Apsheron peninsula of Azerbaijan (ALEKPEROV 1984d), where it occurred with a very
low maximum abundance of about 20 ind.lr and did not show distinct diumal migration (ALEKPEROV 1990).
FOISSNER & PFISTER (1997) recorded large numbers (>1000ind.1r) of U. apsheronica in the late spring
plankton of the highly eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria. DRAGESCO et al. (1914) found their "U.
venatrix" in a pond near Paris, France.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on pollen grains up to 40 pm across (Fig. 1), dinoflagellates,
diatoms and, rarely, on ciliates (FOISSNER & PFISTER 1997). Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens about
35 mg. Reliably recorded from Europe only. Very likely much more common than indicated by literature data be-
cause certainly often confused with -+ U. pelagica or -) U. castalia.
303

Prostom atida
§
0.
--'-'-:
k\
tr4 w
5
CV
+ft+
CA-
llt
+H+
AO
§
-\--*
R§
t-4
'#-l a
aaa
.. -5
h o->r
",>
":JP:.- '1
./ rat i....
11
14
Urotrichaapsheronica (l-l2,tiomFOISSNER&PFISTER 1997; l3-l6.fiomALEKPEROV l9lt4d. l--3,5-9,i1 vivo; .{,conrposireli-on
life and scanning electron microscopical observations; 10, 12, protargol impregnation; 11, 15, 16, silver nitrate impregnation; 14, Feulgen
stain). 1: Lateral view ofrepresentative specimen containing two ingested pollen grains (X). Note distinct extrusome fringe. 2: Somatic (left
two, 5 pm) and oral (right one, 2.5 pm) extrusomes. 3: Pharyngeal rod. 41 7: Details of oral area. 5: Cilia of adoral organelles, length 5 pm. 6:
Shape variant. 8: Oral flap in side and transverse view. Note that flaps are single structures in live cells, but paired after preparation for scan-
ning electron microscopy (Fig.4,4M4).9: Cortical pattem recognizable with interference contrast (cp. Fig. 38, 39). 10: Oblique anterior po-
lar view showing details of oral ciliature. ll, 12, L3r 15: Anterior and posterior polar views. Note exctetory pore of contractile vacuole within
caudal cilia circle, as indicated by single, displaced caudal cilium. 14, 16: Nuclear apparatus (18 pm) and lateral view (60 pm) of ciliary pat-
tem. AO = adoral organelles (= brosse), CA = caudal cilia, C = cilia, CV = contractile vacuole, p6 = paired (double) granules at anterior end
ofciliaryrows,E=extrusomes,EP=excretorypore,OF=oralflaps,R=ridges,UM=undulatingmembrane,X=pollengrains.
304







Prostomatida
Urotricha apsheronica \4043, fiom FOISSNER & PFISTER 1997;44, original fiom same population. 40-44, scanning elec-
tron micrographs). 40-44: Anterior polar views showing oral and brosse (= adoral organelles) structures. Asterisk in (43)
marks centre of oral basket. Arrowheads in (43) denote unciliated basal body at anterior end of ciliary rows; this unciliated
and the following ciliated basal body appear as dikinetid (paired granule) in silver slides (Fig. 23,25). Note variability of
ridges (arrows in 41,42,44) between adoral organelles; the ridges are also recognizable in live specimens (Fig.29,30). The
oral flaps (undulating membrane) form a distinct dome around the oral opening and are composed of two short cilia and an at-
tached extrusome (for details, see U. simonsbergeri). ln live, these three elements appear as a single palp (Fig. 7, 8). AO =
adoral organelles (= 616r.";, OB = oral basket, OF = oral flaps, p = pores: R = ridges between oral flaps.
308

Prostomatida
Urotricha pelagica KAHL, 1e3s
1935 Urotricha pelagica KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 807.
1986 Urotricha pelagica KAHL, 1932 - WILBERT, Arch. Protistenk., 131: 63 (partim, -+ taxonomy; redescrip-
tion from life and after silver impregnation).
l99l Urotricha pelagica KAHL, 1935 - FOISSNER & PFISTER, Limnologica , 27 : 325 (morphological and eco-
logical revision and redescription after silver impregnation and scanning electron microscopy).
Taxonomy
WILBERT (1986a; Fig. 4, 5) obviously mixed three species. The number of ciliary rows (45-50) matches U. pe-
lagica, the number of brosse dikinetids (6-8) matches -+ U. apsheronica, and the number of caudal cilia (up to
l0) and the location of the excretory pore match -+ U. castalia. KRAINER (1988) had the same bad luck. In fact,
these three species are easily confused, although -+ U. castalia differs distinctly by its comparatively inconspicu-
ous, rod-shaped extrusomes, a character which is recognizable only in live specimens.
Difierential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 4V10 x 30-40 pm.
2) Body barrel-shaped with unciliated posterior portion distinctly narrowed and set off plugJike from body
proper (Fig. l-4, I2); rarely almost globular, possibly slightly distorted, specimens occur.
,
3) Macronucleus distinctly (about 2:1) ellipsoidal, rarely reniform, eccentric in mid-body (Fig. 1-3).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end, slightly eccentric, with single excretory pore outside of circle formed by
caudalcilia(Fig. 1-4, 10, 14,19).
5) Extrusomes 5-6 pm long, form distinct peripheral fringe (Fig. 1).
6) 42-50, usually about 46 meridional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by about 20 7o. 14-18 (mean = 16) cir-
cularly arranged, elongated caudal cilia (Fig. 14,9,10,12,14,19).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous in vivo. Undulating membrane circular, consists
of short, paired cilia forming digitate processes (oral flaps) around oral opening. Three serially and obliquely
arranged adoral organelles (brosse) each composed of 24 dikinetids (Fig. 4, 6*9,13,15,17, 18; further details
of oral ciliature, described in the figure legends and in FOISSNER & PFISTER 1997, recognizable only after
silver impregnation and not necessary for identification).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of fast forward swimming interrupted by long jumps at irregular in-
tervals.
Similar species
Easily confused with some other large, distinct trichocysts-bearing urotrichs: Urotricha tricha WANG & NIE,
1933 (usually only 4 caudal cilia), -+ U. valida (unciliated posterior portion not distinctly narrowed, 76-81 ciliry
rows, 10-14 caudal cilia), -+ U. venatrix (unciliated posterior portion not distinctly narrowed, 98-127 ciliary
rows,27-35 caudal cilia), -+ U. apsheronica (most similar species! Excretory pore within circle formed by caudal
cllia, 5142 ciliary rows, 6-8 dikinetids in each adoral organelle). Longifragma obliqua (KAHL, 1926) FOISS-
NER, 1984a has a rounded rectangular outline and a very different brosse (Fig. 7-9 by -+ Urotricha venatrix). -+
Longitricha puytoraci is globular and lacks caudal cllia.2 (posterior portion set off.1, 4 (excretory pore outside cir-
cle formed by caudal cilia) 5, 6 are key characters for identification.
309

Prostomatida
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in lakes and ponds. The locus classicus is probably near Hamburg, Ger-
many (KAHL 1935). WILBERT (1986a), who mixed three species (-+ taxonomy), found U. pelagica in a highly
eutrophic pond in Bonn, Germany, peaking (40 000 ind. lr) during summer. FOISSNER & PFISTER (1997) ob-
served a weak population in the spring plankton of the heavily eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria.
Several records not substantiated by illustrations and possibly partially based on misidentifications because U.
pelagica was very likely often not separated from -+ U. apsheronica, --> U. castalia, and U. tricha, all being su-
perficially rather similar to U. pelagica: oligo- to mesotrophic alpine lake (Piburger See) in Austria peaking
(14 000 ind. I ') during early May and contributing up to 40 Vo of total ciliate biomass (MACEK et al. 1996);
oligotrophic, mesotrophic, and polytrophic Eifel maar lakes in Germany (PACKROFF 1992, PACKROFF &
WILBERT 1991); up to 850 ind. l-' in 0-40 m of the very deep Terterchay reservoir and in other reservoirs of
Azerbaijan (ALEKPEROV 1983, 1984a,1990); 0 (October) to 247 (May) ind. lr in a betamesosaprobic reservoir
of the USSR, mainly in the metalimnion during late spring (MAMAEVA 1976a); 180-2053 ind. l-r in the shore
zone of a reservoir in the USSR (MAMAEVA 1916b); dominating (up to 1200 ind. l') in Ukrainian ponds,
mainly during spring and early summer, where abundances decreased when water temperatures rose over 12o C
(OLEKSIV 1985, 1985a); up to 4225ind.l-r in Ukrainian fishponds (OLEKSIV er al. 1986); Ukrainian pond
during winter (KOVALCHUK & SVINTSOVA 1994);late spring and autumn maxima with up to 5140 ind.l-r in
several lakes of the central Baikal area (LOKOT 1987, ecograms below; further records from the USSR: KUS-
TOVLYANKINA 1990, NEBRAT 199I, OLEKSIV & YALYNSKAYA 1984, TROSHINA 1994, ZHARIKOV
& ROTAR 1992); Wu-Li Lake, China (PAI-KAO-TUNG 1962); Lake Huron, USA (CARRICK & FAHNEN-
STIEL 1990, LAVRENTYEV et al. 1995); acidic (pH 5.5-6.5) lake in Canada (KELLER et al. 1992). KIVI
( 1 986) recorded U . pelagica from brackish water in Finland.
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria, organic debris, and diatoms (ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992). Biomass of
106 specimens 20 mg (ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992) to about 35 mg (our calculation from mean size), according
to OLEKSIV (1985a, b) 17mg atlS-20"C and24mg at 8-12oC. MACEK et al. (1996) obviously underesti-
mated biomass considerably, that is, found a live cell volume of 9480 pm3 (= 9.5 mg per 106 cells), decreasing to
a4sz
*trlH. era./uJ
Ir'ss
[,
4
m,
E,
4 n
Ut
.!
*P, -§ N.
.t.o §r
6'r"
§§lt E,
(r'
t,
Ecograms of Urott'icha pela,grca (from LOKOT 1987). a: Seasonal abundance (ind. I r.1 in lakes Arakhlyey (l), Ivan (2), Shaksha (3), and Ir-
gyen (4). b: Mean numbers (106 ind. m'r) of dominant planktonic ciliates at various statibns of lake Arakhlyey. 1 = Holophrya simplex,2 = U.
pelagica,3 = Lembadion lucens,4 = -; Halteria grandinella,5 = -) Rimostrombidium velox,6 -- --> Limnostrombidium viride,T = total.
310

Prostomatida
6770 pm3 in Lugol-formaldehyde preserved cells. Maximum growth rate in situ 0.35 d-l (mean 0.19 d'; MACEK
et al. 1996). Generation time 15 h at 18-20' C and27 h at 8-i2'C (OLEKSIV 1985a, b). ALEKPEROV (1990)
observed migration from the epilimnion to the metalimnion during daytime. WILBERT (1969, 1986a) fotnd Uro-
tricha pelagica at following conditions (remember, however, that he mixed three species): 2.0_18.4" C,
pH 7.5-8.9, 0.9-l6.2mg l-r Oz,0-1.2 mg l-r NH+*-N, G{.2 mg l-1 NOz-N, 2.8-10.4 mg l-1 NO: -N.
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded only from Austria and Germany. Possibly preferring temperatures
<12" C and thus usually peaking in late spring. Feeds on bacteria, diatoms, and particulate organic matter. Occurs
at all trophic levels, possibly prefening polytrophic conditions.
AO
:/
UM
+
DG !,lV'.-::'.'. -
AO
/ .tl ttt ':.t . .t -r''
MA trr'-". !: ;:: ; ; .. .'n ' . l ^... ' -' :.'- I
E ,a", a a r at. tr ta rt
a
a tt l.
a t tt
I t la
Ia I t r1 t.'
t
fr a a I t 7
I I
CAl
lJrotricha pelagicc (1, fiom KAHL 1935; 2, fiom MAMAEVA 1979; 3, tiom LOKOT 1981:,4,5, äom WILBERT 1986a; Gl l, fiom FOISS-
NER & PFISTER 1997. 1-3, in vivo; 4, composite from live observations and protargol-impregnated cells; 5-7, 9-11, Chatton-Lwoff silver
nitrate impregnation; 8, protargol impregnation). 1r 3: Lateral views, 45 pm,40 pm. Note distinct peripheral fringe of about 5 pm long extru-
somes (1). 2: Lateral view, 20-50 pm. The great size range indicates that several species were confused. 4, 5: Ventral and posterior polar
view. Note that WILBERT mixed three species, namely U. pelagica (number of ciliary rows), -+ U . apsheronica (adoral organelles), and -+
U. castalia (number of caudal cilia, location of excretory pore of contractile vacuole). 6-8: Oblique anterior polar views showing details of so-
matic and oral ciliary pattem. Note variability in number of adoral organelles, that is, four in Figure 7 and three (most common) in Figure 8.
9-11: Anterior and posterior polar view. Note excretory pore of contractile vacuole outside of circle formed caudal cilia, each arising from a
conspicuous "caudal cilium complex" (1 1). AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CA = caudal cilia, CV = contractile vacuole, |§ = paired (dou-
ble) granules at anterior end of ciliary rows, E = extrusomes, EP = excretory pore of contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus, OB = oral bas-
ket, OO = oral opening, UM = undulating membrane (= circumoral kinety = oral flaps).
3rt

Prostomatida
12
ffi
tr
ffi
NW
mN\.)mi\-\i\jiii,,,,,,,0.
ffiWnti.,'jii.Nil'\ii"
ffil\\NW'i ii:iili iii§,::!:!,,
NW
II\\.\NNNN§\\\
sNi-
Urotricha pelagica (12-19, tiom FOISSN ER & PFISTER I 997, population liorn the spring plar.rkton 01' the highly eutrophic pond at Salzbulg
University. l2-16, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation; 17-19, scanning electron micrographs). 12: Lateral view of a representative
specimen. Note somatic ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by about 20 Vo (anow) and distinctly set off unciliated posterior body portion. 13:
Anterior polar view. Arrows mark adoral organelles (brosse), which are smaller than those of -+ Urotricha apsheronica. 14, 19: Posterior po-
lar views showing excretory pore (arrow) ofcontractile vacuole outside the circle formed by the lzt-I8 caudal öilia. This is the main morpho-
logical difference lo -) Urotricha apsheronica, which has the pore within the circle formed by the caudal cilia. 15: Details of oral ciliary pat-
tem recognizable after silver impregnation. 16: Posterior body portion showing rather irregular silverline system and conspicuous caudal cilia
complexes formed by two narrowly spaced granules surrounded by a silverline (cp. Fig. 1 l). Arrow marks posterior end pf ciliary rows. 17,
18: Anterior polar views. Asterisk in (17) marks oral opening. Note paired oral flaps and short brosse (= adoral organelles) cilia (arrows in l8)
emerging between distinct ridges. AO = adoral organelles (= brosse), CA = caudal cilia, DG = paired (double) granules at anterior end ofcili-
ary rows, EP = excretory pore of contractile vacuole, G = argyrophilic granules possibly belonging to extrusomes, IDG = inner ring of double
granules, MA = macronucleus, OF = oral flaps, UM = circular undulating membrane.
3t2

Prostomatida
Urotricha valida soNG & wTLBERT, 1e89
1989 Urotichavalida SONG & WILBERT, Lauterbornia,3:14.
1997 Urotrichavenatix KAHL, 1935 - FOISSNER & PFISTER, Limnologica,2l:324 (revision; partim).
Taxomomy
Incorrectly synonymized with -+ Urotricha venatrix by FOISSNER & PFISTER & (1997); for details, see -» U.
venatrix.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 55-70 x 45-55 pm.
2) Body slightly ovoid to globular, that is, unciliated posterior portion evenly rounded and only indistinctly set off
plugJike from body proper (Fig. 1).
3) Macronucleus reniform to prolate ellipsoidal (occasionally in two pieces), in body centre (Fig. l, 2).
4) Contractile vacuole eccentric in posterior end, location of excretory pore not known (Fig. l, 2).
5) Extrusomes 5-6 pm long, fusiform, narrowly spaced and perpendicularly attached to pellicle, producing con-
spicuous peripheral fringe clearly recognizable only in live specimens (Fig. 1, 2, 4).
6) 16-81', usually 8l meridional ciliary rows shortened slightly posteriorly. 10-14 elongated caudal cilia (Fig. 1,
3).
t) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous in vivo. Undulating membrane circular, consists
of short, paired cilia forming digitate processes (oral flaps) around oral opening. Three serially and obliquely
arranged adoral organelles (brosse), each composed of 10-16 dikinetids (Fig. 1-3; details of oral ciliature rec-
ognizable only after silver impregnation, not necessary for identification).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, swims straight ahead very quickly and performs sharp turns.
Similar species
The rather similar -+ Urotricha venatrix is larger ( 60-120 pm vs. 55-70 pm in U. valida), has more ciliary rows
(98-l2l vs. 75-87) and caudal cilia (27-35 vs. 10-14), and, most importantly, has a different brosse type. Also
easily confused with some other large, distinct trichocysts-bearing urotrichs, which, however, have the unciliated
posterior body portion set off champagne corkJike from the rest of the cell: Urotricha rricfra WANG & NIE, 1933
(usually only 4 caudal cilia), + U. pelagica (42-50 ciliary rows, 14-18 caudal cilia), -+ U. apsheronica (5142
ciliary rows). -+ Urotricha castalia, -+ U. matthesi matthesi, and -+ U. matthesi tristicha are smaller (<50 pm)
and have rod-shaped, inconspicuous extrusomes. Longifragmq obliqua (KAHL, 1926) FOISSNER, 1984ahas a
rounded rectangular outline and a very different brosse (Fig. 6-8). -+ Longitricha puytoraci lacks caudal cllia. 2
(posterior portion not set off, 5, 6 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Locus classicus of U. validn is Bonn, Germany, where some specimens occurred
in the autumn plankton of the Poppelsdorfer Weiher, a eutrophic pond. No further records known.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Food not known. Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens accord-
ing to our calculation about 80 mg. Likely more common than indicated by its late discovery because possibly
sometimes confused with other species or not identified to species level.
313

Prostom atida
'--oF
§
/ffiffi\1
rl{ffi,/
I
4
5
I
Urotricha vali.da (from SONG & WILBERT 1989. l, in vivo; 24, protrgol impregnation; 5, silver nitrate impregnation). l:
Lateral view, 60 pm. 2: Main cell organelles. Note prominent oral basket, which is easily recognizable only after protargol im-
pregnation. 3: Ciliary pattern of ventral anterior body portion. 4: Extrusomes. 5: Silverline system. AO = adoral organelles,
CA=caudalcilia,CV=contractilevacuole,E=extrusomes,MA=macronucleus,Ml=micronucleus,OB=oralbasket,OF
= oral flaps, UM = undulating membrane (= circumoral kinety).
Ao
I
8.
a
a
Longifragma obliqua (6, fiom KAHL 1926; 7, 8, fiom FOISSNER 1984a.6, from lit'e; 7, protargol impregnation; 8, Chatton-
Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation). 6: Oblique anterior polar view, 75 pm.7: Ventral view showing ciliary pattem, nuclear ap-
paratus, oral basket, and adoral organelles. Note that the adoral organelles (brosse) are distinctly different from that of Urotri-
cha (Fig.3 above). 8: Anterior polar view of ciliary pattem AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CA = caudal cilia, OB = oral
basket.
3t4

Prostomatida
(Jrotricha venatrix KAHL , tg3s
1935 Urotricha venatrix KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 807.
l99l Urotrichavenatrix KAHL, 1935 - FOISSNER & PFISTER, Limnologica,2l:324 (see taxonomy).
Imp ro v e d di ag n o s i s: Size invivo about90 x 65 pm. Broadly ellipsoidal with unciliatedposteriorportion
indistinctly set off plug-like from body proper. Macronucleus broadly ellipsoidal. Somatic extrusomes fusiform,
about 6x 1pm, form distinct peripheral fringe. 106 ciliary rows, 31 caudal cilia, and 57 circumoral dikinetids on
average. Caudal cilia form irregular circle, originate from conspicuous cortical protrusions. Brosse enklitoloph-
syntrop, consists of three particularly arranged rows: 1 and 2 side by side, 3 at posterior end of 1 and 2.
Type location of neotype: PelagialofHöglwörtherSee,asmalllakeinsouthernBavaria,Germany
(47"49'N, 12'50'E).
Ne o t y p e s I i d e s: Four slides (2 holotypes,2 paratypes) with silvernitrate andprotargol-impregnated speci-
mens have been deposited in the Oberösterreichische Landesmuseum in Linz (LI), Austria,
Taxonomy
FOISSNER & PFISTER (1997) synonymized -+ Uroticha validc SONG & WILBERT, 1989 with U. venatix
because of distinct similarities in the descriptions. However, now we found another species, which is also similar
to U. venatrix, but clearly different from -> U. valida. Accordingly, we resurrect -+ U. valida and neotypify Uro-
tricha venatrlx, which KAHL (1935) described very superficially (Fig. la). Urotricha venatrix has two outstand-
ing features, namely, a syntropic brosse with particularly arranged adoral organelles, and conspicuous protrusions
from which the caudal cilia originate. Thus, U. yenatrix could be considered as a new genus. However, both fea-
tures ale also present, although less distinctly,in -+ U. apsheronica.
D i f f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (detailed morphometric data, see Table on next page)
l) Size in vivo 60-120 x 40-80 pm, usually about 90 x 65 pm.
2) Body barrel-shaped with unciliated posterior portion indistinctly set off plug-like from body proper (Fig. 1, 1a,
9, 11 ,21). Starving specimens conspicuously cylindroidal and with many 1*3 pm sized fat globules and crys-
tals in posterior end, which thus appears black at low (<100x) magnification (Fig. 8, 9).
3) Macronucleus broadly (1.5:1) ellipsoidal, occasionally reniform, eccentric in mid-body; nucleolus reticulate
(Fig. 1, 9,17,19). Micronucleus not found.
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end, distinctly eccentric on ventral side right of adoral organelles, with single
excretoryporeoutsideof circleformedbycaudalcilia(Fig. 1,la,2,4, 16, l'7,23,29).
s) Extrusomes (2 types) very numerous and clearly recognizable only in live specimens: type 1 exclusively within
oral basket, inconspicuous, about 3 pm long, slightly fusiform and curved (Fig. I , 7 , 18, 22); type 2 between
ciliary rows, produces conspicuous peripheral fringe in live specimens, about 6 x I pm, fusiform (Fig. 1, 7, 18,
19,22,24,30).
6) 98-12'7, usually about 106 slightly spiralling, meridional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by only about
12 7o; unclliated posterior body portion thus inconspicuous. 27-35 (mean = 30.9) slightly elongated (15 pm vs.
10 pm somatic cilia), rather stiff caudal cilia, which originate from cup-like cortical protrusions and form an ir-
regular circle in the posterior pole area (Fig. l, ta,2,4,6, 15, 16,2123,25-30).
7) Oral opening in centre of anterior end. Oral basket conical, inconspicuous in vivo (Fig. 1, l9), but distinct and
extending to posterior third of cell after silver impregnation (Fig. 6, 9, l1). Undulating membrane circular,
consists of about 3 pm long, paired cilia forming an average of 60 digitate processes (oral flaps) around oral
opening; each flap accompanied by an extrusome at cytostomial side (Fig. 36, 39). Three adoral organelles
(brosse), each composed of about 14 dikinetids having about 5 pm long, almost immobile cilia partially cov-
ered by a conspicuous, cuneate cortical plate; brosse enklitoloph-syntrop (somatic ciliary rows abut to brosse at
315

Prostomatida
both sides) and particularly affanged: organelles 1 and 2 side by side, organelle 3 undemeath 1 and 2 (Fig. l-3,
5 , 6, 10, 1 2, 13 , 20, 22, 3I-38; further details, see figure explanations; not necessary for identification).
B) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of fast forward swimming interrupted by long jumps at irregular
intervals.
Similar species
Urotrichavenatrix is easily identified by the particular arrangement and structure ofthe adoral organelles and cau-
dal cilia. Both features are easily recognized with differential interference contrast optics. In most other characters,
U. venatrix overlaps with several other middle-sized and large congeners, especially -+ U. valida, --> U. pelagica,
U. apsheronica (length 40-75 pm vs. 60-120 pm; 42-87 vs.98-127 ciliary rows; 10-18 vs. 2l-35 caudal cilia),
-+ U. simonsbergeri (16 vs. 3 brosse rows; caudal cilia irregular vs. circular), and U. multisetosa WANG & NIE,
1933 (no somatic extrusomesl See Fig. 1a by + U. castalia).2 (unciliated posterior portion indistinctly set off), 5
(peripheral extrusome fringe), 6 (caudal cilia originate from distinct protrusions), 7 (arrangement of adoral organ-
elles) are key characters for identification.
Table: Morphometric data from Urotricha venatrtx.
Characterr Method Mean M SD SE CV Min Max n
Body, length CL 83.4 B2 10.5 2.3 t2.6 6B 113 2l
Body, width CL 59.2 58 5.1 1.2 9.6 48 7l 2t
Ciliary rows, length CL 13.8 15 t0.2 2.2 13.8 55 103 2l
Macronucleus, length P 29.8 30 4.2 0.9 t4.t ,Z,.t 3- 40 2l
Macronucleus, width P 20.t 20 3.0 0.6 14.1 r3 25 2l
tl
Oral opening, diameter P 16.5 1.5 0.3 9.1 T4 t9 21
Brosse row l, length P 6.8 1 1.1 0.2 16. l 4 B 2l
Brosse row 2,length P 1.2 l 0.9 0.2 13.1 5 9 2l
Brosse row 3, length P 6.1 6 l.l 0.2 16.0 5 9 2l
Brosse rows, number P 3.0 aJ 0.0 0.0 0.0 Ja J.. 2t
Dikinetids in brosse row 1, number P 14.0 t4 1.8 0.4 12.6 8 16 2t
Dikinetids in brosse row 2, number P 15.3 15 1.3 0.3 8.6 13 T9 2t
Dikinetids in brosse row 3, number P 14.3 t4 1.1 0.2 1.4 l3 16 2l
Somatic ciliary rows, number CL,P 106.5 105 Ft' -i.1 1.6 6.9 9B t21 2t
Caudal cilia, number P 30.9 30 2.2 0.5 l.l 27 35 2t
Circumoral dikinetids, number P,S 56.8 60 9.9 J^ta.J 17.4 38 61 9
I
Field specimens after Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate (CL) and protargol (P) impregnation and scanning electron microscopy (S). Measure-
mentsinmicrometres.CV=coefficientofvariationinVo,M=median,Max=maximum,Mean=arithmeticmean,Min=minimum,n=
number of specimens investigated, SD = standard deviation, SE = standard error of mean.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: In pond and lake plankton. Locus classicus is the pelagial of a moorland pond near
Hamburg, Germany. KAHL (1935) found [/. venatrix only once, but in considerable number. It fed only on roti-
fers. Urotrichavenatrix has been reported only once since the original description, viz. by SHEN & GU (1965),
who found it rather frequently in Lake Donghu, China. Later, when the lake eutrophified, it disappeared (GONG
1986). We found U. venatrix in a small, eutrophic lake (Höglwörther See) in southern Bavaria, where it occurred
in considerable numbers during the spring ciliate bloom in April and May. As mentioned by KAHL, rotifers were
the preferred food, but pollen grains were also ingested (Fig. 1).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on rotifers and pollen grains. Biomass of 106 medium-sized
specimens about220 mg. Reliably recorded from Europe only. Very likely more common than indicated by litera-
+
ture data because certainly often confused with U. pelagica or not identified.
316

Prostomatida
ffit
it!
'*liiirit§\iil
:ii:1:.:frN\Ul
i:+":#iffi,ffi
..-:ijJfl :;{{/ft11ilil:
:i:..-,
§' .:-''ti{{lJlll
-f-t, if ,t' ,r']'F'r^1,
-l. )p .; - '!, r: r;; lir t; 3il Ii !! ti t, t. , t{ t,
.= ;, r ,
iii;ilii:i;i:i,::,
tllttltt|Ij
,#lrilt,lilli
i i :i ii,1,7,'\i,,',',,' ,'. t' i ', t t t, \ t','t, ','
t, i'; i r.:
j ti' tr t, tt t',s "t', ^: t: s' i' i, 1 ,'i i ii, \1.",1.", ","i ", "
l,l,',,i l, i', i iiI 'i,f.,',,f ',^.,f .i,',i :,\j
rltli 'I{
CA-
qo',,*,,.#
*trqo
o"u * ,.1
r-ao@ oossO I
s
fl
I
fPJ <-
CA
2
Urotricha venatrix (l-4, originals ol'neotype population from the Höglwörthel See in Bavaria; la, li'om KAHL 1935. l, la,
in vivo; 2,3,Chatton-Lwoff silvernitrate impregnation; 4, silvercarbonate impregnation, redrawn fromFig.23). 1, la: Ven-
trolateral views of representative specimens having ingested pollen grains and rotifers, 90 pm, 80 pm. Note the conspicuous
peripheral fringe formed by the extrusomes. Arrow marks adoral organelles, which have shortened, almost immobile cilia. 2:
Simplified figure showing location of adoral organelles and excretory pore of contractile vacuole, 93 pm. Arrow marks poste-
rior end of somatic ciliary rows. 3, 4: Oblique anterior and posterior polar view, diameter about 55 pm; for details, see Figures
5,6,22,23,26-39. Arrow marks excretory pore ofcontractile vacuole. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CA = caudal cilia,
CR = somatic ciliary row, EP = excretory pore of contractile vacuole.
3tl

Prostomatida
,ii.;t,
fu
tj-
:-
a i a'.i :o'-.O"-1 OO\- DG
t ta 'aa t t ot-at-o-.o-aotlaa'
.'t1
?it:}m,'i
aao'.'.-t.rat1o
oao-aoa-.a j.i i;r:,r-:..if i .;i,: :r
-ao o- t. a^a at a. aa aloa tat t. o' .. " t.: o 1 ". r t to ^ a . .. ; ' ': .. -, : .; ]I, - i', :1 .i i .1 1, .. .: ..i: _. , l... r :1 ... t ''.. - :.. : 'ii : ... :i. .. I . .:i -. . : il i:'l : i.f "n . ''.' .i '. .l . '. t' . . ^.' . '' t ;._'. ::' .: -. ':.-'i .': ..; -, '-. ' '., .. .'"1 ' .i l' ,, ;. ': .' i .- : ii .' '. ..,:
'o " aa . . : :: :' : . ' . . : - - : j .. . . ' - '. '- ' '' :
O oa ao oe gta at atr tao ata ta a t , !. .- ' :.1. .r 1i- -' . , - ',? ' !; . -1 , .1 '" i-1 '.. :'' ' -. l :' ,.. r . ..'-.'-.': rj
a t a I
a " oa ao
ao
o
5
fr
l( -0F
8
7
§t
-08
N
GR
tt-
t;-\ UM
oa((o ao aO1Oo ljlt-
DG
t,,a ta, r(( 'O fi rl3 s3
o l t ss--cc
)R
tt
t t
aol,o to ,11
I oa o
11
arotricha venatrix 15-1.1, originals ol neotype populatiorr ll'orr the Höglwöüher See in Bavalia. 5, 6, protalgol irnpregr.ration; 7-9, ll-14, tt
vivo; 10, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation). 5, 6: Ventral and anterior polar view showing details of somatic ald oral ciliary pattem,
diameter 72 pm. Note the peculiar arrangement of the adoral organelles (organelles I and 2 side by side, organelle 3 at posterior end of 1 and
2) and the somatic ciliary rows, which abut to the adoral organelles in a syntropic pattem, that is, at both sides. 7: Somatic (about 6 x 1 pm)
and pharyngeal (about 3 x 0.3 pm) extrusome. 8, 9: Starving, cylindroidal specimen with an accumulation of crystals (Fig. 8) and 1-2 pm
sized fat globules in posterior end. 10: Details of oral and somatic ciliary pattem. 11: The caudal cilia of U. venatrix originate from conspicu-
ous protrusions. L2: Ventral and lateral view of a 60 pm long oral basket rod. 1.3: The oral opening is surrounded by flaps, which originate
from the circumoral basal body pairs. 14: Surface view showing distinct cortical pattem. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CR = ciliary rows,
DG=paired(double)granulesatanteriorendofciliaryrows,F=fibre,QR=granules,MA=macronucleus,N=nematodesmata(oralbasket
rods), OB = oral basket, OF = oral flaps, OO = oral opening, OR = oral ribs, UM = undulating membrane.
318



Prostomatida
:LI :
.fi,. ,
*§W
22 W(r e tri'
A;. ,:- M
#.,wr
ffiiui",r.r.
'|.rt;
k71,,&tt' tt,,'.rt' '::r:
ür,.
:'a/&tl:::,:
W
'«ix
W;:i*,'
ffilti.. l
*-. ,t.t?i't& (ß)r*.tui
..:./9;'.ttt#ti I
h:., '1:,*:i:i!:/l*t).l:t:: tt:t :); , tt ': ,, :: .:): :: ): ii: ::l
;,
1#1tffii/1ii;;i,,.';,ui;'',,' '
t
.iLil:l* -:l-
ü,#it:"t'
24 25
in Bavaria); for details, see following fig:ures.22,23: Oblique anterior and posterior polar view of same specimen. The oral basket opening is
filled with minute, heavily argyrophitic extrusomes and thus appears black. Arrow marks pore of contractile vacuole outside circle formed by
caudal cilia. The ciliary rows end subterminally thus producing an unciliated posterior pole area occupied by an irregular ring of elongated
caudal cilia. 24: Posterior half of cell showing thal U. venatrix has numerous extrusomes (black rods) between the ciliary rows. The extru-
somes form a conspicuous peripheral fringe in live specimens (Fig. 1) and are a main species character. 25: Ciliary pattem of dorsal side. Note
caudal cilia forming an irregular circle (cp. Fig. 16, 23). AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CA = caudal cilia, CR = ciliarY rows, E = extru-
somes, OO = oral opening.
320

Prostomatida
W\
hfu§. §§'§.
t*S§S.sri
* ,+ j §-- g""i
$s*'N'nu§
$"
28
Urotricha venatrix (originals of neotype population liorn Höglwörther See in Bavaria. 26,27 ,29, scanning electron uricrographs; 28, -30, sil-
ver carbonate impregnation). 26-29: Posterior pole area showing caudal cilia, which form an irregular circle and originate from conspicuous,
cupJike cortical differentiations. The coftex is heavily perforated because the extrusomes were released during fixation. Arrows in (26) mark
posterior end ofciliary rows. 30: Posterior body region at high magnification. A minute (kinetodesmal) fibre (arrow) extends anteriorly from
each basal body. CA = caudal cilia, E = extrusome, EP = excretory pore ofcontractile vacuole.
32t

Prostomatida
WI
,ffiE
,tW:ä-,rr7;$r,
t ,o *r n' .r *, o ,'o , r lu +," ,r &i ,* r ','*_rr*r *xffiui.n: f u * *_ { ff f"fi ''r "" *{ ,n 'u o,. {* nf *fi ", ,u w;,l,.*-i",Mffuf 7 i
r
o, n,u* n n"Tr'**"d:*
f
'u * {** ** J*t'*n *" f ."** Xffi; &u,,'rr*::.- fi ri u
?3!=;frT;i
{Wrr\r\
}ffi
,M/j:,j
,ff.ff\WT"'2: -"1 *:fu**n*
"- X
W Wa.:.$" f w _u,., ui , ,',' ?,,. r,: : *' ;{& ":r ;. " o r %: ** yr , T* 4 ä- ; * n. . :, t 4z. s Z_ . ' ;* i:.4 . % T* , ru{ e q: , ü_ §i ' * *i * &* q t\* Y \* o * \*,f *äf ri, r,, * yu .a,w ,a'*- Y
I *'
" ,- #.^. &ä T Z X '; "- ", .W;,*,,,\.* ,q*'*
^ffi:
:q..* ;**o r* ,: lw \%, wn u@ w;;* \* :* fiEfy,*i,*'
*** Tr X ä y *, ** P;,,, ? T.'*. ,n* L i *" üß "& \
Urotricha yenatrix (31, -12, scanning electron micrograpl.rs; -13. Cl.ratton-Lwoll silver nitrate irnpregnation; silvcr carbonatc inrpregna-
tion).31-34: Ventral views ofanterior body portion showing details oforal ciliary pattern (see also Fig. 35-39).There are three particularly
arranged adoral organelles (brosse, numbers 1-3) underneath the oral opening, which is surrounded by conspicuous flaps (specialized cilia
associated with an extrusome) originating from the basal body pairs comprising the undulating membrane. The brosse, whose cilia are short-
ened and almost immobile, is covered by a conspicuous, elongate cortical plate with a longitudinal slit, from which the of organelle 2
emerge, while those oforganelles I and 3 are at the margins ofthe plate. AO = adoral organelles (numbers brosse), DG = paired (dou-
ble) granules at anterior end of ciliary rows, E = extrusomes, OO = oral opening, UM = undulating membrane, l-3 = adoral organelles.
322

Prostomatida
*,.A,
,§*
,.t :*.. *?!
,th"g
'* .*.', +#,, ,, ,,* & * ., ' ,n .4*,, , t"B '
ß
see also Fig. 5, 10, 3l-34 (originals of neotype population from Höglwörther See in Bavaria). 35-39: There are three particularly ananged
adoral organelles (numbers l-3; organelles I and 2 side by side and above obliquely arranged organelle 3) undemeath the oral opening' which
ois u ss ,u r er lo ou nn gd ae ted cb oy r tf ii cn ag le pr- lali tk ee wo ir ta hl afl a lop ns gc ito um dp ino as le sd l io t,f ft rw omo s wp hec icia hl iz the ed cc ili il aia oa fn od r ga an ne ex llt eru s 2o em me e. rT geh ,e wa hd io lera ol ro gr ag na en le lell se s i a ar ne dc o 3v ae rr ee d a tb ty h ea pc lo an tes p mic au r- -
gins. Note that somatic ciliary rows abut to the adoral organelles at both sides (syntropic pattem). Ao = adoral organelles (brosse)' oF = oral
flaps, oo = oral opening, oR = oral ribs, uM = undulating membrane, 1-3 = adoral organelles (brosse)'
323

Prostomatida
Urotrichu simonsbergeri nov. spec.
D i agn o s i s: Sizeinvivo about 100x75pm. Bursiformtobroadly ellipsoidal with sparsely ciliatedposterior
body portion evenly rounded. Macronucleus broadly ellipsoidal. Somatic extrusomes narrowly ovate, 5 pm long,
form distinct peripheral fringe; oral extrusomes rod-shaped, 8 pm long. 92 ciliary rows, 25 scattered caudal cilia,
and 57 circumoral dikinetids on average. Brosse prominent, enklitoloph-dexiotrop, consists of a series of about 16
minute, oblique rows.
Type loc ation: Pelagialof aeutrophic, artificialpondatSalzburgUniversity, Austria (41"41'N,13'40'E).
Type slide s: Three slides (1 holotype,2paratypes) withprotargol-impregnatedspecimens and t holotype
slide with Chatton-Lwoff silver niffate-impregnated specimens have been deposited in the Oberösterreichische
Landesmuseum in Linz (LI), Austria.
D e d i c at i o n: We dedicate this new species to Prof. Dr. Peter SIMONSBERGER, head of the Electron Mi-
croscopy Depafiment at the Institute of Zoology, Salzburg University, for his help and support over many years.
Taxonomy
Urotricha simonsbergeri has several outstanding characteristics, which might justify considering it as type of a
new genus. However, a definite generic character could not be found because the species looks like a combination
of Urotricha and + Bursellopsis. The brosse (many short, oblique rows; Fig. 3,43,46) and the oral flaps (two
short cilia associated with an extrusome; Fig. 4,53, 55) indicate that it is a true Urotricha, whereas other features
(fragility; large, trumpet-shaped oral basket; oral flaps inconspicuous, do not form a dome; ciliary rows end une-
qually anteriorly and posteriorly) are reminiscent of Bursellopsis or occur in both Urotricha and Bursellopsis (ir-
regularly arranged caudal cilia; lack of brosse plate; ordinary movement, that is, not jumping).
D i f f e re n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (detailed morphometricdata, see Table on next page; minor morphological
features, see figure explanations)
L) Size in vivo 7O-120 x 60-100 pm, usually about 100 x 75 pm.
2) Body slightly bursiform to broadly cylindroidal, well-fed specimens almost globular, posterior portion evenly
andbroadlyrounded,thatis,notsetoff plugJikefrombodyproper(Fig. 1,9,19,37).Veryfragile,difficultto
preserve, prepared specimens thus stouter than live ones (Fig. 11, 31, 38).
3) Macronucleus eccentrically in mid-body, broadly ellipsoidal (1.5:1), with many globular ard ellipsoidal nucle-
oli. One micronucleus (Fig. 1, 11, 18, 31,36).
4) Contractile vacuole subterminal, distinctly eccentrical on ventral side slightly right of adoral organelles, with I
(rarely 2 or 3) excretory pore at margin of ciliated/unciliated body portion (Fig. l, 15-17, 30).
5) Extrusomes numerous and clearly recognizable in live and silver carbonate-impregnated specimens: type 1 in
and around oral opening, about 8 pm long, rod-shaped (Fig. 1, 7,26,27); type 2 between ciliary rows, pro-
duces conspicuous peripheral fringe, about 5 x 1 pm, narrowly ovate (Fig. 1,5,6,8, 17, 18, 20,22,24,25,21,
2e).
6) 13-109, usually abott92 meridional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by only about 10 Vo; unclliated posterior
body portion thus inconspicuous (Fig. 1, ll, 12, 17,31,32,38). About 25 slightly elongated (15 pm vs. 10 pm
somatic cilia), rather stiff caudal cilia scattered in posterior pole area (Fig. 1, 15,16,30-32,34,35,40,42).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, comparatively large and thus conspicuous (Fig. 1 , 9 , ll, 19, 3l, 37 , 39).
Oral basket trumpet-shaped and extending to mid-body (Fig. 1, 10, 11,33). Undulating membrane circular,
consists of about 3 pm long, paired cilia forming an average of 57 inconspicuous digitate processes (flaps)
around oral opening; each flap accompanied by an exffusome at cytostomial side (Fig. 3, 4, 12-14, 17,27, 41,
48, 52-55). Brosse (adoral organelles) enklitoloph-dexiotrop (somatic ciliary rows abut to brosse only at right
side), composed of conspicuous series of l22O (mean = 16) minute, obliquely arranged rows sepa.rated from
each other by distinct ridges; individual organelles small and decreasing in length posteriorly, composed of
324

Prostomatida
1-8 dikinetids having about 3 pm long, almost immobile cilia (Fig. 1-3, 1l-13, 17 ,32, 4l-51; further details,
not necessary for identification, see figure explanations).
8) Movement inconspicuous, that is, does not jump like most congeners, but swims moderately fast by rotation
about main body axis.
Similar species
Urotricha simonsbergeri is easily identified, both in vivo and after silver impregnation, by the conspicuous series of
adoral organelles. As concerns size, shape, caudal cilia, and movement, there are several very similar species, for in-
stance -+ U.venntrix (3 large, particularly arranged adoral organelles), -+ Bursellopsis truncata (3 longitudinally
arranged adoral organelles), and Holophrya discolor EHRENBERG, 1833 (3 longitudinally ananged adoral organ-
)
elles, different cortex pattern; see Pelagothrix chlorelligera). Thus, the species-specific series of adoral organ-
elles, which is easily recognizable with interference contrast optics (Fig. 41), is required for identification. 1 (con-
siderable size), 5 (extrusome fringe), 7 (series of about 16 small adoral organelles) are key characters for identifica-
tion.
Table: Morphometric data from Urotricha simonsbergeri.
Characterr Method Mean M SD SE CV Min Max n
Body, length CL 90.8 90 9.9 2.3 10.9 65 110 19
Body, width CL 13.7 75 7.6 1.1 10.3 55 90 t9
Ciliary rows, length CL 82.2 83 9.4 2.2 1 1.5 58 9B 19
Anterior end to brosse end, distance CL 24.1 25 5.2 1.2 20.9 t7 '36 19
Macronucleus, length P 28.0 28 3.9 0.9 t4.0 23 36 t9
Macronucleus, width P 23.3 23 4.3 1.0 18.5 15 32 I9
Oral opening, diameter CL 22.1 22 2.8 0.6 12.4 18 28 I9
Brosse row 2,length P 2.5 aJ 0.6 0.1 22.1 2 4 19
Brosse row '7 ,length P 2.5 J.\ 0.5 0.1 2t.4 2 4 I9
Last brosse row, length P 1.0 1 1 2 19
Excretory pore, diameter CL 4.1 4 0.5 0.1 t2.3 , -1 ) 5 t9
Brosse rows, number CL t6.2 16 2.4 0.6 t4.9 t2 20 r9
Dikinetids in brosse row 2, number P 5.4 5 t.2 0.3 22.4 4 8 19
Dikinetids in brosse row "l , number P 5.5 5 1.4 0.3 24.6 J,.| 8 t9
Dikinetids in last brosse row, number P 2.3 2 0.8 0.2 35.4 1 4 T9
Somatic ciliary rows, number CL, P 92.0 94 8.3 t.9 9.1 F//)\ 109 19
Cilia in a somatic row, number CL 50.5 52 6.4 1.5 12.6 40 60 19
Ciliary rows abutting to brosse, number CL, P t.B B 1.5 0.4 19.6 5 10 I9
Caudal cilia, number P 24.6 25 3.7 1.1 14.9 18 30 11
Circumoral dikinetids, number CL, P s6.9 56 5.6 1.5 9.9 47 65 15
I
Field specimens after Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate (CL) and protargol (P) impregnation. Measurements in micrometres. CV = coefficient
of variation in%o,M - median, Max = maximum, Mean = arithmetic mean, Min = minimum, n = number of specimens investigated, SD =
standard deviation, SE = standard error of mean.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: As yet found only at type location, where it occurred with considerable abundance
in early June during a bloom of algae and ciliates.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on ciliates (e.g. -+ Urotricha castalia), rotifers, pollen
grains, cyanobacteria {Oscillatona), euglenids, diatoms, and Pandorina. Thus, it is often multicoloured like many
nassulids (Fig. 20). Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens about 350 mg. Possibly more common than indicated
by its late discovery because likely often confused with other species or not identified.
325

Prostomatida
r-
l.
oa' aa ,,{
N#u
-Ä
,t.t.t.t.t.7r..t.::.
fffi
. t . . ,1..
.t..lrt.
t..lro ffi
.tlot'
...i'
:o.t.'.'
\.a.ao-.
a O- 1 aaa
t'at
{a aa a
7
Urotricha simonsbergeri (1,2,5-9, in vivo; 3, 10, I l, protargol impregnation; 4, in vivo and fiom SEM rnicrographs). l: Right lateral view of
a representative, slightly bursiform specimen (100 pm) with many food vacuoles and fat droplets. 2,3: Brosse (adoral organelles) lateral and
ventral. Each organelle is composed of paired, obliquely arranged basal bodies, of which only the anterior, slightly larger basal bodies bear a
short cilium. Ciliary rows abut to the brosse only at the right side (enklitoloph-dexiotrop pattem). 4: The oral opening is sunounded by minute
flaps each composed of two 3 ym long cilia (undulating membrane) to which a conical extrusome sac is attached proximally. The sac elon-
gates to a club-shaped structure when the extrusome explodes (Fig. 53. 55j. 5: Optical section of cortex showing extrusome fringe. 6: Somatic
extrusomes are 5 trrm long and asymmetrical. 7: Oral extrusomes are 8 pm long and rod-shaped. 8: Surface view showing extrusomes attached
to corners of squares. 9: Frequent, cylindroidal shape variant. L0: Oral basket, 22 pm across. 11: Main cell organelles, length 70 pm. Arrows
markendofsomaticciliaryrows.AO=adoralorganelles,C=cilia,E=extrusomes,F=fibre,MA=macronucleus,Ml=micronucleus,N=
nematodesmata (oral basket rods), OB = oral basket, UM = undulating membrane.
326

Prostomatida
tl 't /Jliiliill ri\ lU-f{
M
tt tsa
t ) , a ta ta ' , t) a "at 00, aat ra, ) l aa 'ao 0 o a, ao l a o .aOo o,o' ,' O,r r ,ro" ,l l , )'o t' , l a ,) , ,
a
, ,a, )o a aa t,l 0Ia ,,, , 1a0 a)I, ) ,, aa aaaa r a'' "ea ,aa t Ir- ' ''' 2 oot 0 ,, ' a-^ '' a ",, , r r' ' a.
a o to o
a) ,aI )tt r, l)', aa" aa' al'
NW a 0 ) , a, a, 10 21 r0 ,0 0a00 ')' a, ," r, a'' ta -Jo o.t o tl ol, ' ' ' r " ''a Ioo
a a, 1a' .ff 'ao, - a o
, l,, , ) 1o 0 o ,
, ) t 0 , 0 a o ' a a
«ltN a ,00 oa,.
a ,0 , 1a00 ,0a a
aa aa, ,a ,,a, o,, oaa , , o o ao . o'
,
aa att ,t a,
aa l t a,, t)a
,_t\tt ,_ ,, a,t t
a
t
,,, *, a 0
0 a 13
,
0
,+,
,i.
tt'
& ---a'2
T uM
ta
I
I
:
a
t a
I
.\
.CA
EP_
15
urotricha simonsbergeri,oral and somatic ciliary pattern* (1 i2 i, i 14-16, p "*ro -t "a rgol impregnation; 13, Chatton-Lwofr silvel nitrate irnpregnation)'
t l p r2 oi o; w, lelr si s , a d, f rt oe;l t a* nA , oA wn ht c|e i o§ c mr hi ' o m# cr eo r nna T ctan eid nf wsfp iio ts, hs c: t ae : at r " t peio J r aer rd:p "o dJJl aa (ur di i d ov l a ui ie l bl w § c lei' l if a8 gf .0 ri aH 1u n3r un :J eVt .it e it Lnr "tä r ra gr h- v i* e ow, ' n @ s r" h o* r o m .w "i in n :a g !t e pt hi s m: ari, t .g : ch t+: t ir l. :iv aX Au r byni oe .: o uq: t*u: .a ol r nl ul ev b i tub hl ,oL irt th do" ; ba o, fr foä o tsu hs1 n eed " c o. it lh- n iaei ly" r y o^ a r rt# a ol r wiI go" sp hä e t c n oT si min däg me '^ ea N nn# o cdi e te.t h' sre t uh: bapT ato pfs c ift cie li aiTr a li lo r yy;r '
t i e ) l t f b r
cA=caudalcilia,CR=ciliaryrows,EP=excfetorypore,n=fibre'N=nematodesmata(oralbasketrods)'uM=undulatingmembrane'
321

Prostomatida
\ /
19
IJrotricha simonsbergeri (l] 20,22, in vivo; 21, silver carbonate impregnation; 23, scanning rnicrograph). 17, 18,20t Slightly squeezed
specimens. In surface view (17), the extrusomes appear as bright dots; in optical section (18, 20), they form a distinct fringe offine rods. The
cells contain many fat globules and food vacuoles. 19: Cylindroidal shape variant. Arrows delimit opening of oral basket. 21,23: Cortical pat-
tern in posterior body region. Arrows mark end of ciliary rows. 22: Surface view showing cortical pattem, ciliary rows (black lines), and many
bright dots (arrows), the extrusomes, in the corners of the squares. AO = adoral organelles, C = cilium, E = extrusomes, EP = excretory pore of
conhactile vacuole, FG = fat globules, FV = food vacuoles, MA = macronucleus, UM = undulating membrane.
328

Prostomatida
::lr!riä!.,f...-,/i)W)))))r) .,,:
.,iW#));t/tW)
,;:': ::,:: , t,:;;,,, ,,t:;::;l ,:.:;:11 ,
I1rotricha simonsbergeri (24-26. in vivo; 2l-29, silver carbonate impregnation; 30, scanning electron micrograph). 24: Surtäce view showing
the dense extrusome layer. 25126129,: Urotricha simonsbergeribas two types ofextrusomes: type 1 (arrows) is thom-shaped (narrowly ovate)
and slightly asymmetrical,5pm long, and attached to the somatic coftex(24,25);type 2 (arrowhead) is rod-shaped,8pm long, and found
only in the surroundings of the oral opening (26, 27 , 28). The somatic extrusomes become strongly inflated in silver carbonate preparations
and formaldehyde-treated specimens (29).27r 28: Anterior ventral body region showing oral structures and rod-shaped oral extrusomes (cp.
26). 30: Posterior pole region showing scattered caudal cilia and excretory pores of conffactile vacuole. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CA =
caudal cilia, E = extrusomes, EP = excretory pores of contractile vacuole, UM = undulating membrane.
329

Prostom atida
tr
rM,l
35
Urotricha simonsbergeri.3l,32: Dorsal and ventral view ofsame specimen. Arrows mark end ofciliary rows, arrowheads caudal cilia.33:
The oral basket is trumpet-shaped. 34, 35: Posterior polar views showing unequal ending of ciliary rows and scattered caudal cilia (arrows).
36: Nuclear apparatus. AO = adoral organelles, E = extrusomes, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, OB = oral basket.
330

Prostomatida
Urotricha simonsbergeri, scanning electron micrographs of the somatic and oral ciliary pattern. 37,39: Dorsal and anlerior polar view. The
oral opening, which is striated by the basket rods, is surrounded by oral flaps (arrows) shown at higher magnification in Figures 45,52-55.
The oral flaps of Urotricha simonsbergeri are much more inconspicuous than those of other urotrichs (see, for instance, scanning electron
micrographs of -+ U. apsheronica and -+ U. venatrix), that is, do not form a dome because they are widely spaced and short as compared to
the size of the oral opening. However, the absolute size of the flaps is the same as in other species, namely 3 pm. These particularities make
the oral opening of Urotricha simonsbergeri more similar to that of -+ Bursellopsis (see, for instance -+ B. pelagica) than to that of Urotri-
cha. The arrowhead marks the brosse (adoral organelles), which is shown at higher magnification in Figures 4 l-5 1 . 38: Lateral view. Urotri-
cha simonsbergeri does not jump, unlike most congeners. Note distinct metachronal waves and sparsely ciliated posterior pole region which
is very small as compared to the size of the cell and thus hardly recognizable (Fig. 32, 35). 40: Posterior polar view of a demembranated
specimen (cell membrane and outer alveolar membrane removed). The alveolar pattem, shown at higher magnification in Figure 23, is regu-
lar in the ciliated body portion and irregular in the pole area, where scattered caudal cilia occur (Fig. 30). OO = oral opening.
33t

Prostom atida
Urotrtcha simonsbergeri (4t, in vivo; 42,43,protargol impregnation;44,45, scanning electron micrographs).41-45: The oral apparatus con-
sists of an inconspicuous undulating membrane formed by the oral flaps, and a prominent array of short adoral organelles separated from each
other by small ridges, unlike, for examplO, in -+ U. venatrix, where they are covered by a plate-like formation. Further details, see next plate.
AO=adoralorganelles,CA=caudalcilia,E=extrusomes,F=fibre,OF=oralflaps,UM=undulatingmembrane.
552

Prostomatida
,:i:.:tt)
AO i;t:|ri.t{liy 4ru:t ;i;;,
,1,t:,: ,., ltt: ,,,, :: ::: :,: lt: ):r ::j:l!ir',' . | &.t../. i./t tt/t ?W);w .! ii4 ':, 1i." ',:
i);:,:,#' :
..,N.,'
' ,j i ': :,:i. t§: :!?t : t: :: ,: :!: :'.t i :t t fi ::l .: i; :. : ,l..ii i.e: t\ :, l:.&)l
, f tttl!:W.::::.r.:.1i.
,.,'iii,,.,,,,,,
,.&-:- . :,',:#'1,::;:' '#1"'::::::&t'.
I , :i ii :! ,: :i i ii:: ,:i::. 'i::l .:: :f .f: :ii.: i,: :it i: ::::: :::.6' ; - 1- 1::': it 'i :. W ;- ,! :4 ,:/i lo
I1rotricha simonsbergeri (46,47, scanning electron micrographs;48-51, silver impregnation).46-51: Oral structures (general explanation,
see Figures 41-45). The adora"l organelles (brosse) consist ofpaired basal bodies (dikinetids), which have only the anterior, slightly larger ba-
sal body ciliated. The size of the organelles decreases from anterior to posterior. The ciliary rows left of the brosse are unshortened, while
those at right abut at steep angles. AO = adoral organelles, F = fibres, OF = oral flaps, OO = oral opening, UM = undulating membrane.
J., J., J.l

Prostomatida
Urotricha simonsbergeri, scanning electron micrographs of the oral structures. Scale bars indicate 20 pm (52,54), respectively, 2 pm (53,
55); note, however, that structures have about double size in life, that is, shrink by about 25-50 7o during preiraration. 52, 54: The oral opening
is surrounded by inconspicuous and rather disordered flaps (arrows), in contrast to typical LJrotricha species, for instance --> U. apsheronica,
where the flaps form a conspicuous, domelike array. 53, 55: An oral flap consists of two about 3 pm long cilia (arrowheads) to which a coni-
cal extrusome sac is attached proximally (inset, arrows). The sac elongates to an about 17 pm long club (arrows), when the extrusome ex-
plodes. AO = adoral organelles, N = nematodesmata (oral basket rods), P = ring of pores in oral basket.
334

Prostomatida
U rotrichu c astalia uuNoz, tßrrpz a rsRNÄNoEZ-cALrANo, I 987
1987 Urotricha castalia trtUNOZ, tBtl,gZ A f'BRNÄNOEZ-GALIANO, Acta Protozool., 26:200.
1994 Urotricha rotunda FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS & NOVILLO, Proc. biol. Soc. Wash., lO7:231(synonym).
199] Urotricha castalia MUNOZ, TßLLEZ & FERNÄNDEZ-GALIANO, 1987 - FOISSNER & PFISTER,
Limnologica,2l: 336 (revision; detailed discussion of synonymy and redescription after live observations
and silver impregnation).
Taxonomy
The original descriptions of U. castalia and U. rotunda are superficial, that is, from squashed silver carbonate-
impregnated specimens. Thus, only the data from the detailed redescription by FOISSNER & PFISTER (1997),
which matches the sparse observations of the Spanish authors rather well, will be used in the differential diagnosis.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 30-40 x 20-30 pm.
2) Body ellipsoidal to slightly fusiform because oral opening rather distinctly projecting and unciliated posterior
portion usually narrowed and set off plug-like from body proper (Fig. 2a, 3, 26).
3) Macronucleus ellipsoidal, eccentric in mid-body (Fig. 2a, 3, 13, 2l).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end, slightly eccentric, with single excretory pore usually within (rarely out-
side) circle formed by caudal cilia (Fig. 2a, 6, 9, 18, 28).
5) Extrusomes (2 types) numerous but inconspicuous in live specimens: type 1 about 3 pm long, slightly
fusiform, very numerous in and around oral opening and in longitudinal rows between ciliary rows; type 2
about 6 pm long, rod-shaped, found only in unciliated posterior body portion (Fig.24, 13-16, 19,20,24).
6) 3446, usually 38-40 meridional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by about 20 7o.8-10 (mean = 9; Salzburg
population) or 4-9 (mean = 7;Lake Constance population) circularly arranged, elongated caudal cilia (Fig. 2a,
3, 6, 12, 14, 18, 22, 25, 26, 28).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous in vivo. Undulating membrane circular, consists
of short, paired cilia forming digitate processes (oral flaps) around oral opening. Three (rarely up to 5) serially
and obliquely arranged adoral organelles (brosse) each compos ed of 2-5 dikinetids (Fig. 2a, 3 , 5 , '7 , 8, 10, 12,
13, 11 , 21, 23, 25, 21; details of oral ciliature, described in the figure explanations and in FOISSNER & PFIS-
TER 1997, recognizable only after silver impregnation or scanning electron microscopy and not necessary for
identification).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of fast forward swimming interrupted by wide jumps at irregular inter-
vals.
Similar species
Easily confused with the similar-sized -+ U. matthesi (28-38, usually 3l ciliary rows; Iacks elongated extru-
somes in posterior body portion). Urotricha pusilla PENARD, 1922, also about 30-40 pm long, is cylindrical
and has 2*8 widely spaced, obliquely spread caudal c1lia. Uroticha multisetosa WANG & NIE, 1933 (Fig. 1a;
90 pm long) and U. faurei DRAGESCO, IFTODE & FRYD-VERSAVEL, 1914 (Fig. lb-d; 55-60 ciliary rows)
lack somatic extrusomes. -+ Urotricha venatrix, -+ Urotricha valida, -+ U. pelagica, and -+ U. apsheronica are
larger (>50 pm) and have prominent, fusiform somatic extrusomes producing a conspicuous peripheral fringe in
live specimens. 1,5 (2 types of inconspicuous, rod-shaped somatic extrusomes), 6 are key characters for identifi-
cation.
335

Prostomatida
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Likely common in pond and lake plankton. The locus classicus of (J. castalia is in
Madrid, Spain, where MUNOZ et al. (1987) observed large numbers in an artificial pond in the "Parque de Berlin"
from October to May. Locus classicus of the synonym, U. rotunda, is a reservoir at La Jarosa, about 60 km from
Madrid, Spain (FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS & NOVILLO 1994). FOISSNER & PFISTER (1997) found U.
castalia in Lake Constance, Germany (collected by H. MÜLLER) and in the highly eutrophic pond at Salzburg
University, Austria, mainly during late spring.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on small flagellates (MUNOZ et at. 1987), Rhodomonas (H.
MÜLLER, pers. comm.) , Peridinium sp. and Chlamydomonas sp. (FOISSNER & PFISTER 1997). Biomass of 106
medium-sized specimens according to our calculations about 12 mg. Reliably recorded from Europe only. Proba-
bly more cofilmon than indicated by literature data because very likely often confused with other similar-sized uro-
trichs with more than two caudal cilia.
AO
. - o 1 ao .
. Cp
t. .t . ^t -t.t. . -.1.-..:-.,.-
IP
. . :'-.: jr..§ tY:i::i-.n'..'..
olaao o . . : .f' -l3tf, .i-'. t .-
,,iiili*l
1i,,1
, o : : :'. :: i,7lt§:: .j'.' . .
. t '. . '..-j:.- tr,ra*{'.r:t.-.'.._..
' .-o.ta .t : : t '!C
o
Uroticha species with three or more caudal cilia not described in this book. Ia: U ron'iclru nultisetosa in vivo (fiom WANG & NIE 1933),
length about 90 pm. 1b{: Urotrichafaurei (from DRAGESCO et al. 1974.b,ftom live and protargol-impregnated specimens; c, d, Chatton-
Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation). Lateral view (45 trrm) and anterior and posterior polar view of ciliature. AO = adoral organelles, CA = cau-
dal cilia, CP = cortical pattem, EP = excretory pore of contractile vacuole.
336

Prostomatida
it
A Nl#lttü,t
'//
N\YVtyt r'
ü
7
AO
I
NNNN§-
11
Urotricha castalia (2-8, from FOISSNER & PFISTER 1997; 10, from MUNOZ et al. 1987; I l, 12, fiom FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS & NO-
VILLO 1994. 24, in vivo;5-:7,9, prolrgol impregnation; 8, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation; 10-12, silver carbonate
impregnation). 2a: Lateral view of a specimen (32 pm) from Lake Constance with posterior body portion only indistinctly set off from body
proper (cp. Fig. 3). 2b, 4: Extrusomes. The short rods (type 1; 2.5-3.0 pm long) are very numerous and occur in the oral apparatus and along
the somatic ciliary rows. The long (5*6 pm) rods are found only in the unciliated posterior body portion (Fig. 2a,3). 3: Lateral view of a rep-
resentative specimen (32 pm) from the pond at Salzburg University. Note that in this population the posterior body portion is distinctly set off
from the body proper. 5: Anterior polar view of a specimen with 3 adoral organelles (arrow). 6, 9: Posterior polar views showing shortened so-
matic ciliary rows, circle formed by caudal cilia, and excretory pore (arrow) ofcontractile vacuole within (6, usually location) or slightly out-
side (9, unusual location) the circle formed by the caudal cilia. 7, 8: Oblique ventral views showing details of oral structures and brosse (adoral
organelles) variability. 10: Ventral view of type population (from squashed preparation). 11, 12: General and ventrolateral view (squashed
preparations) ofthe synonym U. rotunda. AO = adoral orgalelles (brosse), C = cilia, CA = caudal cilia, CV = contractile vacuole, DG = paired
(double) granules at anterior end of ciliary rows, E = extrusomes (2 types), EP = excretory pore of contractile vacuole, F = microfibrillar ring,
FV = food vacuole, KD = kinetodesmal fibres, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, OF = oral flaps, UM = undulating membrane (= cir-
cumoral kinety = oral flaps).
337

Prostomatida
',*.ffiÄ
"räti#,
li.lw;äi;:',t'|t '
\ ,:.,
14 15
4,
..8,o ., :&r. _s:.:t.ll:§i::t::t ,lY|
p.:o '4,, ,
'" n.3*
'ilg.l.tl:/iiä::l:li:l;tt):!.i_i?.//|!iä1:::ü:1 il):i,f'e41/r.:i.i:i:i:!!: 18
I ß i
tti:ilii,llii,ii.ffifffi,ffi^
,j;r:t;tt".,lrijl///.i:ltJlv//rä),4,i I v b
:w,+try
CA
IJrotrichacüstalia(13-21 ,tionrFOtSSNER&PFISTER 1991 .13,16, lg,20,invivointerte|encecontrastrnicloglaphs; 14, 15, 17, l8,sil-
ver carbonate impregnation; 21, protargol impregnation). 13, 16,19: Flattened specimens showing main organelles (macronucleus, oral ap-
paratus, extrusomes). Note that l|rotricha castalia is studded with short (2.5-3.0 pm), rod-shaped extrusomes (some of which seen in top
view, arrowheads) in the ciliated body portion and with long (5-6 pm), rod-shaped extrusomes in the unciliated plug. 14' 15: Flattened
specimens showing extrusomes and somatic ciliary rows extending about 80 Vo (anow) ofbody length. Note single circle ofextrusomes sur-
rounding oral opening (15). t7, 18: Oblique anterior and posterior polar view of same specimen showing somatic and oral ciliature. Urorri-
cha castaliahas3446 ciliary rows (Lake Constance population and Salzburg population) and 3 adoral organelles. The anterior adoral or-
ganelle is composed of4-5 dikinetids, the middle of3-5, and the posterior oneof2-3. The undulating membrane consists of l6-25 (mean =
21) dikinetids in the Lake Constance population mdof 17-24 (mean = 19) dikinetids in the Salzburg population. Asterisk in (17) marks oral
opening, arrow in (18) denotes faintly stained excretory pore, which is usually within (rarely outside, see Fig. 9) the caudal cilia circle. 20:
Cortical pattem and extrusomes (anowheads) in surface view. 21: Main cell organelles. Note the prominent oral basket, which is clearly rec-
ognizable only after protargol impregnation (cp. Fig. 19). AO = adoral organelles, CA = caudal cilia, E = extrusomes, FG = fat globules, MA
= macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, OA = oral apparatus, OB = oral basket.
338
I

Prostomatida
:äl:::
::&.1
'f:|Q Yi'|:::.t:,i:i::::ti,,::::ii:iffi
6
Urotricha castalia (22*24, fiom FOISSNER & PFISTER lL)L)7:25-28, originals. 22-24. silver impregnation; 25-2tt, SEM micrographs). 22:
Lateral view. Arrow marks posterior end of ciliary rows. 23: Ventrolateral view with adoral organelles marked by arrowheads. 24: Oblique
anterior view showing brosse (adoral organelles) kineties (arrowheads) and deeply impregnated extrusomes around oral opening (asterisk). 25,
28: Anterior and posterior polar view. Arrow in (28) denotes excretory pore in caudal cilia circle. 26:Lateral view showing caudal cilia and
metachronal waves of somatic cilia.27:, The adoral organelles are separated by cortical ridges (arrow). BA = bacteria, CA = caudal cilia, DG =
paired (double) granules at anterior end of ciliary rows, E = extrusomes, FV = food vacuole, OF = oral flaps, OO = oral opening.
339

Prostomatida
Urotricha matthesi subspecies matthesi KRATweR, 1995 nov. stat.
1995 U rotric ha matthesi KRAINER, Lauterbomia, 2l : 43.
1991 Urotricha matthesi KRAINER, 1995 - FOISSNER & PFISTER, Limnologica , 27 : 340 (revision).
Taxonomy
FOISSNER & PFISTER (1991) reinvestigated the type slides. They found several major discrepancies to KRAI-
NER's description and figures: (1) some specimens have a distinctly narrowed posterior body portion, indicating
that the plug is more distinct in vivo than described and figured by KRAINER; (2) the excretory pore of the con-
tractile vacuole is not within but distinctly outside the area occupied by the caudal cilia as, for example, i:n -+ Uro-
tricha pelagica; (3) the ciliary rows are shorter than described, that is, terminate in the posterior quarter, as is
usual; (4) in 3 out of 9 specimens the basal bodies are as regularly spaced as in cther Urotricha species; (5) there
are not 4-5 or 24 catdal cilia, as stated by KRAINER, btt34; (6) there a-re not 5 adoral organelles, as diagnosed
and described, but 5 or 6 as also shown in one of KRAINER's figures (Fig. a). Furthermore, the length of the ex-
trusomes (unfortunately not recognizable in the type slides) differs greatly in the figure (1.3 pm; Fig. 1) and de-
scription (4 pm). These data are included in the following differential diagnosis. Investigation of further popula-
tions recommended.
Di fferential diagnosis
See taxonomy section for some discrepancies between the original description and illustrations and the following
differential diagnosis !
1) Size in vivo 30-45 x 20-40 pm.
2) Body ovoid to ellipsoidal with unciliated posterior portion indistinctly to distinctly narrowed and set off plug-
like from body proper (Fig. 1).
3) Macronucleus ellipsoidal, eccenffic in mid-body (Fig. 1).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end, eccentric, with single excretory pore distinctly outside area occupied by
caudal cilia (Fig. 1, 2; misdrawn in Fig. 3).
5) Extrusomes rare and tiny, rod-shaped, according to original description about 4 pm long, according to original
illustration only about 1.3 pm long (Fig. 1).
6) 28-35, usually about 32 meridional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by about 20 Vo. 34 circularly arranged
caudal cilia about half as long as body (Fig. 1-3).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous in vivo. Undulating membrane circular, consists
of short, paired cilia forming digitate processes (oral flaps) around oral opening. 5-6 serially and obliquely ar-
ranged adoral organelles (brosse) each composed of 24 dikinetids (Fig. 1, 2, 4; fwther details of oral ciliature
recognizable only after silver impregnation and not necessary for identification).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of fast for:ward swimming intemrpted by wide jumps at irregular inter-
vals.
Similar species
The subspecies -+ Urotricha matthesi tristicha is conical and invariably has only 3 adoral organelles. Also easily
confused with -+ U. castalia (6pm long extrusomes il posterior end,4-10 caudal cilia, 34-50 ciliary rows). -+
Urotricha venatrix, -; U. valida, --> U. pelagica, and -) U. apsheronica arelarger and, more importantly, have
prominent, fusiform somatic extrusomes, producing a conspicuous peripheral fringe in live specimens. Urotricha
multisetosa (Fig. 1a by -+ U. castalia;90 pm long, >10 caudal cilia) and U. faurei (Fig. 1b-d by -+ U. castalia;
340

Prostomatida
55-60 ciliary rows, >10 caudal cilia) lack somatic extrusomes. Pelagothrix alveolata (Fig. 4-6 by -+ P. chlorellig-
era)and-+Pelagothrixchlorelligerahave symbioticgreenalgaeandveryconspicuouscorticalalveoli. 1,2,5,6,
7 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: As yet known only from type location, that is, the plankton of an oligo- to meso-
trophic groundwater pond in Styria, Austria.
Autecological data and ecologicat summary: Food not known. Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens accord-
ing to our calculations about 17 mg. Possibly more common than indicated by its late discovery because probably
sometimes confused with other species or not identified to species level.
,6,''1't":'i..$
.f , a.. " 1; -. -. {l 1: .'a4. -. ,a: a:' ..- .i/ j .. a- -': i i.; '. .- ''.; -1 .a.: :.: §.o. ' '-- ;. a 3a' ,. 1t . 'l .:' 'aa -e a. a a- .-. aa' a1 :' a' a oaa .. a:. ' ' :ta- ' - - --' - ' a.a' .a'' .. i. .r -l 3 1' ^s. a:a. aajs' Z' ta .. :s to.i a. .. .i t .i!! lt! li :i ' ''!! 3o :l :i aaai' .li II!! o: t;o. . a] ai
l ': r. - \r a i. l:a -t J 'a - a' o :' j a'a al a- 4 \. a. '" oa i. ' aa t 'aa a a ,t Ita a .'a a .a ,ta , , .t aa a aa, :o:.: 'a' a:. r, t l ;3 3 r , [l i t 1J
3 l '-: . -' o l " . o ' a 'a a 'iaiaaa aaa t '. a a. : : 3a : 4aaa
-
: i i a ' a a -a
. aa 3 aaa :aa :+ l -I' ' ;- ,. _..' ." a. "' a f.o.
i t , ' : . . ] : ) . t a ' ' ' .t ' it aa . k - , , r : a ' : :- - - a .' . z..7.j .- l'" -.-
EP_ :t.'t-'---t'
Urotricha matthesi matthesi (from KRAINER 1995. l, in vivo; 24, protargol impregnation). l: Lateral view of specimen
with large food inclusions, very likely algae, length 30 pm. 2: Ciliary pattem of ventral side, 32 pm. Arrowhead marks adoral
organelles each composed of 2-4 dikinetids. Arrow denotes cortical meshes (alveoli, silverline system). 3, 4: Posterior and an-
terior polar view of ciliary pattem. A reinvestigation of the type slides by FOISSNER & PFISTER (1997) revealed that the
excretory pore is not within the circle formed by the caudal cilia, as shown in Figure 3, but distinctly outside. Figure 4 shows a
specimen with 6 adoral organelles. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CA = caudal cilia, CV = contractile vacuole, EP = excre-
tory pore of contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuole, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, OB = oral basket, OF = oral
flaps (paired cilia forming digitate processes), UM = circumoral kinety (undulating membrane composed of basal body pairs
from which the oral flaps originate).
341

Prostomat;da
Urotricha matthesi subspecies tristichaForssNER & pFrsrER, 1e97
1997 Urotricha matthesi tristicha FOISSNER & PFISTER, Limnologica,2T:343.
Differentj al diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 3545 x25-35 pm.
2) Body conical to broadly fusiform or almost globular, oral area often slightly rostrate, accentuating fusiform
shape; unciliated posterior portion gradually but distinctly narrowed and thus set off plug-like from body
proper (Fig. 1, 2).
3) Macronucleus ellipsoidal, eccentric in mid-body (Fig. 1, 8).
4) Contractile vacuole and excretory pore distinctly subterminal and outside area occupied by caudal cilia (Fig. l,
6, 8, 9).
s) Exffusomes numerous but inconspicuous because rod-shaped and only 2.5 pm long, often extruded when
specimens become distorted under cover glass (Fig. 1, 4).
6) 28-35, usually about32 meridional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by about 20 To.Usually 4,rarely 5 circu-
larly arranged, elongated caudal cilia (Fig. 1,6,8-10).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous in vivo. Undulating membrane circular, consists
of short, paired cilia forming digitate processes (oral flaps) around oral opening. Three serially and obliquely
arranged adoral organelles (brosse) each composed of 2-5 dikinetids (Fig. 1, 3,1,8, 10; further details of oral
ciliature recognizable only after silver impregnation and not necessary for identification).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of fast forward swimming interrupted by wide jumps at irregular inter-
vals.
Similar species
-)
The subspecies Urotricha matthesi matthesi is ellipsoidal and has 5-6 adoral organelles. Also easily confused
with -+ Urotricha castalia, which has, however,6pm long extrusomes in the posterior end,7 caudal cilia, and
34-50 (mean = 40) ciliary rows. -+ Urotricha venatrix, -+ U. valida, -+ U. pelagica, and -+ U. apsheronica are
larger and, more importantly, have prominent, fusiform somatic extrusomes producing a conspicuous peripheral
fringe in live specimens. Urotricha multisetosa (Fig. 1a by -+ U. castalia;90 pm long, >10 caudal cilia) and U.
faurei (Fig. 1b-d by -+ U. castalia; 55-60 ciliary rows, >10 caudal cilia) lack somatic extrusomes. -+ Pelagothrix
chlorelligera and P. alveolata (Fig.4-6by P. chlorelligera)have symbiotic green algae and conspicuous cortical
alveoli. 1,2,5,6,7 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: As yet found only at type location, that is, the pelagial of the highly eutrophic, arti-
ficial pond at Salzburg University, Austria. It occurred in low numbers during April and July.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on Chlamydomonas sp., diatoms (Fig. 1), and dinoflagel-
lates (FOISSNER & PFISTER 1997). Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens according to our calculations
about 18 mg. Possibly more common than indicated by its late discovery because probably sometimes confused
with other species or not identified to species level.
342

Prostomatida
a
:',"-.,4
=E
fr
W
I
4
5
AO
tl
a aa
aa
. .t-o1 t . : . . '-^ta a o t . t.a
.:':o'"
oaoo
rllao
a
..:tto
aa a
olao 7
CP ..aaaa a' a
Urotricha matthesi tristicha (1-9, fiom FOISSNER & PFISTER 1997; 10, original
from type location. I-6, in vivo; J-9, protargol impregnation; 10, SEM micrograph).
lz Lateral view, 38 pm. 2: Shape variants. [Jrotricha matthesi tristicha ts conical or
fusiform, whereas -+ U. matthesi matthesi is usually ellipsoidal. 3: Anterior polar
view showing oral flaps each composed of two short (2 pm) processes. 4: Extru-
some, 2.5 pm long. 5: A ridge extends right of each ciliary row. 6: Posterior polar
1 view. The pore (arrowhead) of the contractile vacuole is distinctly outside of the cir-
cle formed by the 4 (rarely 5) caudal cilia. 7: Ventrolateral view showing details of
somatic and oral ciliature. In contrast to -> U. matthesi matthesi, which has 5- 6
adoral membranelles, IJ. matthesi tristicha has only 3. 8, 9: Oblique anterior and
posterior polar view showing general organization of ciliary pattern and nuclear ap-
paratus. 10: Dividing specimen showing the newly formed brosse (arrowhead) and
the common number (a) of caudal cilia. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CA = cau-
dal cilia, CP = cortical pattern, CR = ciliary rows, CV = contractile vacuole, E = ex-
trusomes (2.5 prm long), EP = eXCretory pore of contractile vacuole, FV = food vacu-
ole, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, OF = oral flaps (paired cilia forming
digitate processes), UM = undulating membrane (circumoral ciliary row composed
of basal body pairs from which the oral flaps originate).
343

Prostomatida
U ro tric ha fur c ata scHEwrAKoFF, 1 8e2
1892 Urotricha furcata SCHEWIAKOFF, Verh. naturh.-med. Ver. Heidelb., 4: 553 (without illustration but with
sufficient diagnosis).
1893 Urotrichafurcata SCHEWIAKOFF,Zap. imp. Akad. Nauk,41: 32 (againdescribed as new species; with il-
lustration).
1930 Urotrichafurcata SCHEWIAKOFF, 1893 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 59 (revision).
1990 Uroticha furcata SCHEWIAKOFF, 1892 - FOISSNER & O'DONOGHUE, Invert. Taxon., 3: 663 (rede-
scription after silver impregnation).
1990 Urotricha furcata SCHEWIAKOFF, 1893 - FOISSNER, OLEKSIV & MÜLLER, Arch. Protistenk., 138:
(redescription from life and after silver impregnation).
1994 Urotricha furcata SCHEWIAKOFF, 1892 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte
des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll94: 366 (taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Di lferential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 20-30 x 15-20 pm.
2) Body broadly ellipsoidal with unciliated posterior portion not set off plug-like from body proper (Fig. 1, 2).
3) Macronucleus globular, near mid-body (Fig. l, 2, 5,l).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end, slightly eccentric (FiS. l, 2, q.
s) No extrusomes recognizable.
6) 17-24, usually about 21 meridional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by about 30Vo.Invariably 2 elongated
caudal cilia (Fig. I,2,4-7).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous in vivo. Undulating membrane circular, consists
of short, paired cilia forming digitate processes (oral flaps) around oral opening. Two serially arranged, tiny
adoral organelles (brosse; Fig. 1-3, 5-8; further details of oral ciliature recognizable only after silver impreg-
nation and not necessary for identification).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of rather fast spinning or swimming intemrpted by wide jumps.
Similar species
Urotricha mqcrostoma FOISSNER, 1983 and -+ U. pseudofurcata also have 2 caudal cilia. However, U. macro-
stoma is slightly longer (30-40 pm) and has 3 adoral organelles and minute extrusomes (Fig. 9). -+ Urotricha
pseudofurcata is cylindrical and has 2*3 pm long extrusomes. All other small Urotricha species described in this
book have either only I caudal cilium or 3 or more caudal cilia. 1, 2 (broadly ellipsoidal), 5,6 (2 catdal cllia),1 (2
adoral organelles) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common and sometimes abundant in the pelagial, rare in benthic habitats and run-
ning waters. SCHEWIAKOFF (1892, 1893) discovered large numbers of Urotricha furcata in the algal mud of a
volcano lake in Oahu, Hawaii.
Further records: small, alpine karst lake (Dreibrüdersee) in Austria (JERSABEK & SCHABETSBERGER 1996);
small, meromictic lake in Upper Austria (NAUWERCK 1996); up to 1200 ind.l-1 in the May plankton of the
Piburger See, a small oligo- to mesotrophic lake in the Austrian Alps (MACEK et al. 1996, SOMMARUGA &
PSENNER 1993); occasionally dominant in a large, mesotrophic, alkaline lake (Neusiedlersee) in Austria, that is,
344

Prostomatida
together with -+ Balanion planctonicum, accounting for 46 Eo of total ciliate numbers in spring and June
(SCHÖNBERGER 1994); in Lake Constance, Germany, from March to December 1988 with a mean of
991 ind. f r (1.68 mm3 m-3, 1.0 mm3 mr d-r potential production,0--20 m) and a peak with 42500 ind. 1-r in spring
(FOISSNER et al. 1990, MÜLLER 1989, MÜLLER et al. 1991, CLEVEN 1996); pelagial of a hypertrophic lake
(Heiligensee) in Germany (SKIBBE 1991); with low abundance in Bavarian road puddles (DINGFELDER 1962);
Belauer See, Germany (ZIMMERMANN 1994); dominant (up to 2O Vo of total ciliate abundance and 9 Vo of total
ciliate biomass) in the eutrophic iSmov Reservoir, southern Bohemia, during August and September (MACEK et
al. 1996, §IUgf et al. 1995); Ukrainian pond during winter (KOVALCHUK & SVINTSOVA 1994); pond in
Australia (FOISSNER & O'DONOGHUE 1990); Lake Huron, USA (LAVRENTYEV et al. 1995). MADONI
(1980) and MADONI & GHETTI (1981) found huge numbers of U. furcata in a mesosaprobic section of a brook
in northem Italy, and SHEN & IANG (1919) recorded it from the plankton of Chinese rivers.
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria, picocyanobacteia, Rhodomonas and Cryptomonas (FOISSNER et al.
1990, SIMEK et al. 1995, 1997, SKIBBE 1991, WEISSE & MONTAGNES 1998). Grazing rates are about23
bacteria cell-r h-r and 2 picocyanobacteria cell-r h-r (SIMEK et al. 1995). Generation time about 27 h at 8.5" C
(MÜLLER 1989; -+ Tabte). MACEK et aI. (1996) estimated a growth rate of 0.20 t 0.10 d-l (maximum 0.35 d ')
in the Piburger See and 0.65 t 0.41 d-' in the üJmov Reservoir. Biomass of 106 specimens: 0.93 + 0.69 mg (fixa-
tion in alkaline Lugol followedby 2 7o formalin; §fUBf et al. 1995); about 1.7 mg (mercuric chloride fixation;
MÜLLER t989);34 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1994,M,ÜLLER & GELLER 1993); 6.4mg (NESTERENKO & KO-
VALCHUK 1991). SKIBBE (1991) fotnd U. furcata in a hypertrophic lake at 8-16 'C, pH7.4-8.2, <l0l 7o oxy-
gen saturation, 0.024.1 mg lr NH+*-N, <0.31 mg 1-' NO: -N, and <0.71 mg 1-' soluble reactive phosphorus. Very
recently and too late to be included in this book, WEISSE & MONTAGNES (1998) provided interesting data on
temperature effects in various U.furcata isolates.
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Europe, Hawaii, and Australia. Mainly planktonic in oligo-, meso-,
and eutrophic stagnant waters. Feeds on bacteria and autotrophic flagellates. Eurythermic and oligo-stenohaline.
Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER etal. (1994): betamesosaprobic (o=2, b = 6, a =2,I= 3, SI = 2.0).
oc
Species dt rm rnean Qto
(and rangc)
Pseudobahnion 5.5 3 7 24 0.46 (0.44 -0.52) 5.4
planctonimm 9 3 4 24 o.g3 (0.76- o,gg) 1.5
t2 3 4 24 0.94 , (0.91- 1.01) 2,2
15.5 3 3 24 1.24 (1.19 -1.32) 2.0
18.5 3 ,: 1.52 (1.41- 1.56)
:
2t.5 18 lethal
Uroticha 5.5 6 7 24 0.46 (0,37 - 0.59) 1.4
furcau 9 3 6 24 0.52 (0.49 -0.54) 2.2
t2 3 5 24 0.66 (0.60 - o.7o) 1.4 Table. Experimentally determined values
15.5 3 4 t2 0.75 (0.71-o.go) 6.7 of r* (dr) and Qro of -> Balanion planc-
18.5 3 3 t2 1.33 (1.23- 1.40) 2,3 tonicum (= P seudobalanion planctoni-
21.5 3 2.5 t2 1,72 (1.6S - t.7g) cum), Urotricha furcata,, -+ Pelagostrom-
Pehgostom- 5.5 3 10 48 o.o3 (0.01-0.05) * hidium mirabile (= P. fallax),, and -+ Ri-
b'dium falkx 9 3 I 24 0.21 (0.20 - 0.24) 10,1 mostrombidium lacustris (= Strobilidium
t2 3 5 24 0.42 (0.41-0.43) 2,4 lacustris). From MÜLLER & GELLER
15.5 3 4 t2 0,57 (0.46-0.65) 2.6 ( 1993). n = number of replicates; t = pe-
0J6
18.5 3 3 t2 (0.73 -0.79) 1.8 riod of logarithmic growth (d); dt = sam-
21.5 3 2.5 t2 0.90 (0.81-0.94) pling interval (h).Data for Balanion
Strobilidium 5.5 6 4 24 0.43 (0.34 - o.5g) 2.6 planctonicum from MULLER ( I 99 I ).
hcustis 9 6 4 24 0.60 (0.54 -0.67) 1,7
21 1 12 15 8 ,. . 55 5 6 6 6 4 2 2 1, .5 2 t t2 24 o 0 1 t.. . . 47 9 3 2o 9 9 (( ( (00 11. .. .9 36 25 22 0 - --- 0 1 1 1. . . .7 0 5 67 4 5 0) ) )) 2 3 1. . ,17 0 t m* h) e rQ , g bo ir lof eo w r t5 th . 55 r .a 5-9 "te . C0 o' C wf aPn so e t l na p ogr o to s sv tr ii god nme id fb i, ci d as iui nn n tc lte
i a a y
5 5 6
different from zero.
345

Prostom atida
oF
UM-..
-
I
rv{
-MA
taol
CR
a'r
t. t.
:
ooa
,i;;,;;,,'j#ij
r, .aJ, .j.is' -i, i't. i.' . ' o.
I
"di"'
a.i
t c A<'. li:, "
a ßj!..
rt
'!"r
' t'o '". . ,f.i.1\.
ar :..1t _ i.l "t' t,o or,'ricil:r
.
t:
a
a \:
a
a ;
a
aa ao
a
C
*sir
A,:,""','',7
/
Urotrichafurcata (1, afier SCHEWIAKOFF 1893;2,5, tiom FOISSNER et al. 1990; 3,4,6, fiom FOISSNER & O'DONOGHUE 1990; 7,8,
originals. 1, 2, in vivo; 3-8, protargol impregnation). 1,2: Swimming specimens, 23 pm, 30pm. 3,4: Anterior and posterior polar view of
ciliary pattem, 25 pm. Arrowhead marks adoral organelles. 5, 6: Ciliary pattem of ventral and dorsal side, 22 pm, 18;rm. 7, 8: Lateral and
oblique anterior polar view. Arrows mark posterior end of ciliary rows. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CA = caudal cilia, CR = ciliary rows,
CV=contractilevacuole,EP=excretorypore,FV=foodvacuoles,G=granules(notbasalbodies),MA=macronucleus,Ml=micronucleus,
OF = oral flaps, UM = undulating membrane (oral flaps). arobbha macrostoma (9, from FOISSNER 1983), 3G-40 }rm.
346

Prostomatida
IJ rotricha p s eudofurcatüKRATNER, tsss
5
199 U r o tr i c ha p s e udofurcara KRAINER, Lauterbornia, 2l : 40.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 15-30 x 10-15 pm.
2) Body roughly cylindroidal with unciliated posterior portion slightly narrowed and somewhat set off plug-like
from body proper (Fig. 1).
3) Macronucleus globular, near mid-body (Fig. 1, 3).
4) Contractile vacuole subterminal, slightly eccentric (Fig. 1).
5) Extrusomes fusiform, 3-4 pm long, arranged along ciliary rows, impregnate with protargol (Fig. 1-3).
6) 25-27 meridional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by only 12 Vo according to the live specimens (Fig. 1);
however, the illustration of the silver-impregnated specimen and the text indicate about 33 7o (Fig.3), as in
most other species of the genus. Invariably 2 elongated caudal cilia (Fig. 1, 3).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous in vivo. Undulating membrane circular, con-
sists of short, paired cilia forming digitate processes (oral flaps) around oral opening. Two closely spaced,
tiny adoral organelles (brosse; Fig. 1, 3, 4; further details of oral ciliature recognizable only after silver im-
pregnation and not necessary for identification).
r
8) Movement inconspicuous, that is, sluggishly swimming, not jumping like other urotrichs.
Similar species
+
Urotricha furcata and Urotricha macrostoma-
FOISSNER, 1983 also have 2 caudal cilia.
However, -) (Jrotricha furcata is broadly ellip-
soidal and lacks extrusomes. Urotricha macro-
stoma is slightly larger (30-40 pm) and has 3
adoral organelles (Fig. 9 by + U. furcata). All
other small Urotricha species described in the
present book have either only 1 caudal cilium or
3 or more caudal cilia. I, 2 (body cylindroidal),
5, 6 (2 caudal cllia), 7 (2 adoral organelles) are
key characters for identification.
:FG
Ecology
/
Occurrence and distribution: As yet found CV
only at type location, that is, the pelagial of a CK
oligo- to mesotrophic groundwater pond (Till- 3
mitscher Baggersee) in Styria, Austria. AO
UM4
Autecological data and ecological summary:
Food not known. Biomass of 106 specimens Urotricha pseudofurcata (from KRAINER 1995. 1,2, in vivo; 3, 4, pro-
about 2 mg. Possibly more common than indi- targol impregnation). 1: Lateral view, 25 pm. 2: Extrusome, 3 pm. 3: Cili-
cated by the late discovery because probably ary pattern, nuclear apparatus, and extrusomes,20 pm. 4z Oral ciliary pat-
sometimes confused with other species or not tern. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CA = caudal cilia, CV = contractile
vacuole, E = extrusomes, FG = fat globule, MA = macronucleus, MI = mi-
identified to species level. cronucleus, OB = oral basket, OF = oral flaps, UM = undulating mem-
brane (circumoral ciliary row) giving rise to the oral flaps.
347

Prostomatida
Urotricha agilis (sroKES, 1886) KAHL, re30
1886 Balanitozoon agile STOKES, Ann. Mag. nal Hist., 17: 110.
1922 Balanitozoon agile STOKES 1887 - PENARD, Etudes Infusoires, p. 20 (redescription from life).
1930 Urotricha (Balanitozoon) agilis STOKES, 1886 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 58 (revision; combining
author).
1979 UrotichaagilisSTOKES(1886)-FOISSNER,Int.Revueges.Hydrobiol.,64:119(redescriptionfromlife
and after silver impregnation).
1994 Uroticha agilis (STOKES, 1886) KAHL,l93O - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informations-
berichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, U94: 349 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and
ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
Very likely, Urotricha nais MtJfiOZ, TßLLEZ & FERNÄNDEZ-GALIANO, 1987 is a junior synonym of [Jro-
tricha agilis.
D i i f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s
1) Size in vivo about 10-20 x 7-14 pm.
2) Body roughly cone-shaped, that is, outline triangular with unciliated posterior portion not set off plug-like
from body proper (Fig. 1-a, 6).
3) Macronucleus globular, near mid-body (Fig. a, 11).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end, slightly eccenffic (Fig. 1-a).
5) Extrusomes sparse and inconspicuous because short, thin, and rod-shaped (Fig. 4, I2).
6) l2-I4 meridional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by about 30 Vo.Invaiably I caudal cilium of body length
(Fig. l-6,8).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous in vivo. Undulating membrane circular, consists
of short, paired cilia forming digitate processes (oral flaps) around oral opening (Fig. 1-5, 7, I 1; details of oral
ciliature not yet known and not necessary for identification).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of very fast spinning intemrpted by wide jumps at irregular inter-
vals.
Similar species
In spite of its small size, easy to recognize as Urotricha because of the spinning and jumping movement (note that
small Cyclidiaz species show a similar behaviourl) and the single caudal cilium. It is also easy to identify in silver
slides because it is the sole species with a single caudal cilium having <15 somatic ciliary rows; all other small
urotrichs, except for U. nais mentioned above, have >20 ciliary rows. In vivo, however, the characteristic body
shape must serve as main character because the number of ciliary rows is difficult to recognize. -+ Urotricha fur-
cata is slightly longer (20-30 pm) and invariably has 2 caudal cilia. --> Urotricha matthesi tristicha, which is
rather similar in shape, is distinctly larger (35-45 pm) and has 4 caudal cilia. -+ Balanion planctonicum, which is
similar in size, is bursiform and has very long and thus conspicuous oral flaps. 1,2,6,7 (oral flaps short) are key
characters for identification.
348

Prostom attda
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in eutrophic and saprobic stagnant waters, rare in brooks and rivers. The
locus classicus of Urotricha agilis is probably near Trenton, New Jersey, USA, where STOKES (1886b) lived and
worked; he found high numbers in a Sphagnum pond. KAHL (1930) observed it near Hamburg, Germany. PE-
NARD (1922) found considerable numbers in Swiss ponds. FOISSNER (1979c) observed, like STOKES, high
numbers of Urotricha agilis in highly eutrophic and saprobic pasture ponds in the Austrian Alps, where it oc-
curred together with Urotricha ovata; rarcly , it was found in clean rururing waters of this region.
Further records: groundwater samples in Czechoslovakia (MORAVCOVÄ 1986); benthal of fertilized and unferti-
lized fishponds in Poland (GRABACK A l97l); eutrophic lake in China during winter and spring (GONG 1986);
on artificial substrates (polyurethane foams) exposed in a bog pond (20-26' C, pH 5.8-6.0, 6-10 mg l-t Oz) and a
pit pond (19-27" C, pH 8.0-9.0, 5-10 mg l-1 Oz) in Michigan, USA (YONGUE et al. 1973); at2U24" C in Doug-
las Lake, Michigan, USA, where it did not colonize exposed artificial substrates (CAIRNS et aL. 1973); productive
man-made pond in Virginia, USA, in autumn, receiving drainage from a bamyard as well as from a stream flowing
through a pasture (YONGUE & CAIRNS 1973); wetlands of the Northem Lower Michigan, USA (HENEBRY et
al. 1981); in the pitcherc of Sarracenia purpurea (ADDICOTT 1974); oligotrophic and mesotrophic lakes on
Signy Island, Antarctica (HAWTHORN & ELLIS-EVANS 1984).
Records from running waters: rare in a clean mountain river (FOISSNER 1997) and in two mesosaprobic lowland
brooks in Germany (HEUSS 1976); ox-bow of Danube River in Slovakia (MATIS & TIzuAKOVÄ tgg+b); soft
water river in the USA (PATRICK 1961).
Records from terrestrial habitats (for example, SMITH 1973) arc very likely misidentifications.
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria and flagellates (FOISSNER 1980b). Biomass of 106 specimens about
0.5 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1994). PATRICK et al. (1967) recorded Urotricha agilis two times in the Savannah
River, USA, at23-28" C,>5-7 mg l-1 Oz, 0.009-0.03 mg l-t NH:-N, <0.007 mg l-tNOz-N,0.074.2 mg l-'NO:--
N, <10 mg l-1 Cl-. FOISSNER (1979c) and FOISSNER et al. (1982) found it in 14 small, beta- to alphameso-
saprobic, alpine water bodies at following conditions (41 analyses): 0.220" C, pH 4.8-5.6,2.8-11.3 mg l-t Oz
(33-163 7o saturation), 8-76 mg l-1 KMnO4-consumption, 0.46-6.2 mg l-1 NII+*-N, 0-0.45 mg l-1 NO:--N, 0 to
3mgl-l NOz-N,0-1.5mgl-1 HzS. Upper temperaturä limit 34'C (MATIS & STRAKOVÄ-STRIE§KOVÄ
1991).
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Europe and North America only. Mainly planktonic and possibly
more cornmon than indicated by literature data becausb probably sometimes confused with other species or not
identified to species level due to its small size. Eurythermic and oligo-stenohaline. As a bacteria and flagellate
feeder, Urotricha agilis very likely indicates eutrophic or highly eutrophic conditions, especially when occurring
in considerable number (>1000 ind. l-t). Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et al. (1994): be-
tamesosaprobic to alphamesosaprobic (b = 5, a = 5, I = 3, SI = 2.5).
349

Prostom atida
0r
OB
Ia
i.
FV< ll
,
MA
Ml=
t-tlr:
!
t ffi,
a I
lo
I
o oo ?o
CV
CP
SS
CA
7
10 11
Urotricha agilis (1, tl'om STOKES l8tt6b; 2, fl'orn KAHL 1930; 3, tiom PENARD 1922t 4-l2.ll'om FOISSNER et al. 1994. l-4, in vivo;
5*10, Klein-Foissner silver nitrate impregnation; 1 1, 12, protargol impregnation). l-4zLaleral views, length without caudal cilium 15-20 pm.
5-10: Ciliary pattern and silverline system. On the right half of Figure 5 only the direct-connecting silverline system is shown, on the left also
the indirect-connecting system. In the specimen shown in Fig. 9 mainly the indirect-connecting silverline system has impregnated, whereas in
the specimen shown in Fig. 10 only the direct-connecting system has stained. Arrows in (6, 8-10) mark posterior end of ciliary rows, which
are distinctly shortened posteriorly, leaving blank a large posterior area, the centre of which bears a single caudal cilium. The posterior portion
ofthe cell is often packed with argyrophilic granules (6). 11, 12: Ciliary pattem, macronucleus, food vacuoles, and oral opening. Arrows mark
rod-shaped extrusomes, which are difficult to recognize in live specimens. CA = caudal cilium, CP = cytopyge, CR = ciliary rows, CV = con-
tractilevacuole,E=extrusomes,FV=foodvacuoles,MA=macronucleus,Ml=micronucleus,OB=oralbasket,OO=oralopening,OF=
oral flaps (= undulating membrane), SS = silverline system.
350

Prostomatida
Urotrichafarcta clepeRenE & LACHMANN, r8s9
1859 Llrotrichafarcta Cf-RpRnEpE & LACHMANN, M6m. Inst. natn. g6nev., 6:314.
1887 Balanitizoon gyrans STOKES, Am. mon. microsc. J.,8:142 (according to KAHL 1930 a junior synonym).
1906 Urotricha minkewickzi SCHOUTEDEN, Annls Biol. lacustre, l: 393 (according to KAHL 1930 a junior
synonym).
1922 urotricha parvula PENARD, Etudes infusoires, p. 18 (according to KAHL 1930 and our experience a jun-
ior synonym).
1930 Urotrichafarcta CLAP. u. L., 1858 * KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 58 (revision).
1962 Urotricha farcta CLAPAREDE et LACHMANN - LIEBMANN, Handbuch der Frischwasser- und
Abwasser-Biologie I, p. 354 (saprobic characterization).
1974 Urotrichafarcta CLAP. et LACHM., 1858 - DRAGESCO, IFTODE & FRYD-VERSAVEL, Protistologi-
ca, 10: 71 (redescription from silver impregnated specimens, -+ taxonomy).
1994 Urotrichafarcra CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN, 1859 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informa-
tionsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll94: 352 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic
and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
DRAGESCO et al. (1914; Fig. 7, 9) either investigated a different species (the shape of the live specimen does not
match other illustrations) or made some misobservations because it is unlikely that a Urotricha with 30 ciliary
rows has only 1 adoral organelle. Thus FOISSNER et al. (1994) redescribed the species (Fig. 10-26), A further
problem concerns body shape: although being very constant and characteristic, it is highly susceptible to environ-
mental changes and prolonged microscopic observation. Typically, it is as shown in Figures 2 md 5 and by LIEB-
MANN (Fig. 6) and PENARD (Fig. 8), who, however, did not recognize the shortened ciliary rows, which
changes the overall appearance considerably. Distorted specimens usually have a flabby and/or hemispherical pos-
terior body portion and the caudal cilium more or less dislocated and obliquely spread (Fig. 21); obviously CLA-
PAREDE & LACHMANN (Fig. 1) and KAHL (Fig.5) illustrated such specimens.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 15-30 x 15-25 pm, usually abott2o-25 x 20 pm.
2) Body shape (outline) very characteristic: anterior half conical (triangular), posterior like an inverted, truncated
cone (trapeziform) with rear portion not or only very slightly set off plug-like from body proper (-+ taxonomy
and Fig. 2, 5, 16, 20, 22, 2426).
3) Macronucleus globular, eccentric in mid-body (Fig.2,5, 10, 18, 25).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end, slightly subterminal and eccentric (Fig. 1, 2, 5, 18,29).
5) Extrusomes in oral basket and along ciliary rows, very inconspicuous because short (1.5-2.0tr-), thin, and
rod-shaped (Fig. 2,3, 10).
6) 2U25 meridional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by about 30 Vo.Invariably I slightly eccentric caudal cil-
ium at least half as long as body (Fig. 2,5,1{o119,22,24,29).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, seemingly snout-like projecting from body proper due to narrowed ante-
rior end and straight oral flaps. Oral basket inconspicuous in vivo but distinct after protargol impregnation. Un-
dulating membrane circular, consists of about 10 dikinetids having short, paired cilia forming digitate proc-
esses (oral flaps) around oral opening. Three (rarely two, Fig. 30) serially arranged, tiny adoral organelles
(brosse; Fig.2, 4,5, 9, 10, 12, 14-16,22,23,25,27 ,28,30; details of oral ciliature recognizable only after sil-
ver impregnation and not necessary for identification; further information, see figure explanations).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of moderately fast spinning or swimming intemrpted by wide jumps at
irregular intervals.
351

Prostomatida
Similar species
Easily recognizable as (Jrotrichabecause of the jumping movement and the single caudal cilium (do not confuse
with small Cyclidium species, which show the same features!). However, in vivo Urotricha farcla is difficult to
separate from other small species of the genus, namely U. ovata KAHL, 1926 (possibly synonymous; body ellip-
soidal, 25-50 pm, oral flaps indistinct), -s U. agilis (triangular body outline, 10-20 pm, 12-74 clliary rows), -+
U. globosa (globular), and + U. platystoma (usually >30 pm long, extrusomes more conspicuous because 3-5 pm
long, about 42 ciliary rows). -+ Urotricha furcqta, which is rather similar in size and shape, invariably has 2 cau-
dal cilia. -+ Urotricha matthesi is also rather similar in shape, but is larger (3545 pm) and has 4 caudal cilia. ->
Balanion planctonicum is bursiform and has very long and thus conspicuous oral flaps. 1,2, 6,7 (oral flaps short
as compared with those of -s Balanion) arekey characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common throughout the year and often abundant in slightly to distinctly polluted,
eutrophic waters with putrefying plants (KAHL 1930, LIEBMANN 1962). Usually near rhe mud, but also com-
mon in lake plankton (BICK 1972a).
Locus classicls of Uroticha farcta is Berlin, Germany, where CLAPAREOS & LACHMANN (1859) found
many specimens in an infusion. STOKES (1887c) discovered the synonym Balanitizoon gyrans in a pond, likely
near Trenton, New Jersey, USA, where he lived and worked. Locus classicus of the synonym Urotricha parvula is
a pond in Geneva, Switzerland, where PENARD (1922) found an abundant population in September. Locus classi-
cls of Urotricha minkewicfrzi is Bologoe in Russia.
Pelagic and benthic records from stagnant waters (most not substantiated by illustrations): pelagiai of oligotrophic
groundwater ponds in Styria, Austria (KRAINER 1988); hypertrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria
(BLATTERER 1989); among littoral algae in a Bohemian pond (§VEC 1897); aerobic sediment of a lake in Eng-
land (BRYANT & LAYBOURN 1974); siderotrophic, mesotrophic lake in Germany (MÜCKE 1979);pelagial of
a eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Bonn, Germany, throughout the year peaking (30 000 ind. tt) in sum-
mer (WILBERT 1969); frequent in a leaf-litter area of a pond in Germany, abundant, however, only during spring
and autumn (BICK 7957, 1958); eutrophic forest lake in Germany throughout the year with peaks in the aerobic
pelagial (18 m) during May (1848 ind. ft) and in the anoxic zone at 25 m during July (89 ind. I-'; RECK 1987; --s
Table); frequent in the mud of Hamburg Harbour, Germany (BARTSCH & HARTWIG 1984); rain puddles in
Finland (LEVANDER 1900); the Netherlands (VAN OYE 1922; Fig. 24-26 from a population supplied by K.
fÜnCeNS); mud of fertilized and unfertilized rearing fishponds in Poland (GRABACKA l91l); Lake Geneva,
Switzerland (ROUX 1900, 1901); pelagial of mesotrophic, eutrophic, and hypertrophic lakes in Switzerland
@ÜRGI et al. 1985) and Germany (Fig. 2); benthic in'a eutrophic bay of the Kremenchug reservoir, Ukraine (KO-
VALCHUK & SKORIK 1988); Ukrainian pond during winter (KOVALCHUK & SVINTSOVA 1994); subarctic
tundra lakes, USSR (LAVRENTYEV 1989); pelagial of acidic and circumneutral oligotrophic, mesotrophic,
eutrophic, and hypertrophic lakes in Florida, USA (BEAVER & CRISMAN 1989a).
Also common in running waters, for example, plankton of Danube River and its ox-bows in Slovakia and Hungary
(MATIS & TIRJAKOYA 1994b, NOSBK & BERECZKY 1994), and up to 12 000 ind. l-' in the plankton of an
American river (LACKEY 1942); see FOISSNER et al. (L994) for a detailed compilation of benthic records from
small and large running waters.
Urotricha farcta has also been recorded from marshes, bogs, Sphagnum ponds (JACOBSON 1928, MERMOD
1914, MESSIKOMMER 1954, SCHNEIDER 1930, STEWART et al. 1986), and groundwaters (MORAVCOVÄ
1986). Rare in activated sludge (CURDS 1975, FOISSNER et al. L994), but common in sewage fishponds,
sewage-irrigated fields, and polluted dammed rivers (LIEBMANN 1962).
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria, small algae (Cryptomonas, Ochromonas) and organic debris (BICK 1972a,
CHARDEZ 1984, KAHL 1930, NOLAND 1925, RIGGENBACH 1922, ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992). Biomass
of 106 specimens according ro NESTERENKO & KOVALCHI-IK (1991) about 1.7 mg, according to FOISSNER et
352

Prostomatida
at. (1994) 5 mg, according to BÜRGI et al. (1935) 8 mg. Growth (d r) at 25-30'C: 1.8 (WEISSE MONTAGNES
1998). MATIS & STRAKOVÄ-STRIE§KOVÄ (1991) found U. farcta in a brook and in warm lakes ar 7-36'C
and pH 6.V7.5. According to LIEBMANN (1962), it avoids hydrogen sulphide and is insensitive to pH variations;
BICK (1957), however, reported that it tolerates up to 0.5 mg 1-r HzS. NOSEK & BERECZKY (1994) observed a
highly significant, positive correlation between abundance of U . farcta and chemical oxygen demand, while the cor-
relation between abundance and ammonium was highly negative. Autecological data -+ Table.
Table: Autecological data fromarobichafarcta.Column 1, from BICK & KUNZE (1971; summary of literature data); column 2, from
BERECZKY (1975; several analyses from Hungarian part of Danube River); column 3, from DETCHEVA (1983b, c; several analyses from
Bulgarian rivers); columns 4 and 5, from RECK (1987; several analyses from a eutrophic lake in Germany; column 4, total occurrence; col-
umn 5, >1000 ind. lr); column 6, from MIHAILOWITSCH (1989;2-j analyses from a salrpolluted river in Germany).
Parameters References
1 2 J..| 4 5 6
Frequency (7o) 0.89-1.20
Temperature ('C) 0-25 0-t7 tt.8-22.2 3.8-19.0 3.8-4.8 7.4-fl.3
pH 6.4-8.2 7.1-8.2 I .2-7 .1 1 .0-9.2 74 t .7 -8.0
o, (mg 1') 0-t4..1 5.2-t4.4 5.3-8.1 0-13.9 3.0-6.5
Oz (saturation 7o) 49-68 0-149 23-50
l')
BoDs (mg 5.1-10.6
COz r". (mg l-r) 0-1 5 0-27 t7 -87
l')
NH+*-N (mg 0-1 1.6 0-0.82 0.07-0.31 0.025-0.6 38 0.31-0.42
NO: -N (mg I') t.0-2.1 0.32-0.4r 2.5-3.3
l')
NOz-N (mg 0-0.045 0-0.012 0.04-0.07
Bacteria ml ' (x10u; direct count) r-Ll0
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Eura-
sia only. Possibly more common than indicated by
literature data because very likely often not identi-
fied to species level. Planktonic and benthic. Com-
mon in all seasons, eurythermic and oligo- to meso-
stenohaline. Feeds mainly on bacterra; thus Urotri-
cha farcta very likely indicates eutrophic or highly
eutrophic conditions, especially when abundant 3
r).
(>1000 ind. 1 Saprobic classification according to
F'OISSNER et al. (1994): alphamesosaprobic to
betamesosaprobic (b - 4, a - 6,I = 3, SI - 2.6).
UM
,'lr/ l\
Urotricha farcta ( 1, from KENT 1882 redrawn from CLA- o a 'lo.' o o
PAREDE & LACHMANN 1859; 21, originals. 1-3, in vivo; 4, a .t !t L. o
protargol impregnation). 1: Distorted specimen (20 pm) with oD ./
caudal cilium obliquely spread. 2: Right lateral view of a repre- o o/t o'
a o
sentative specimen,25 pm. 3: Extrusome, 1.5-2.0 pm. 4: Adoral o
o o
organelles (arrowheads) and undulating membrane (UM) com- aoo
o4
posed of 9-14 paired cilia. CV = contractile vacuole, MA = mac-
ronucleus.
353

Prostom attda
-MA
FV
CV
8
Wi:tt?1,.Ni:; |W.:
Y I ,t,%,t;: , t, ff7 ilt. l'
:::W" ;"
,9,|,,W'
''&.:i ." ll t| :)f*fiil, ):.,r,::, t1-l :t-l:t-.: ::..tir. :',i::-.li :l
:t t
::,,, :::,, :a,,:,,t l::::::i.i.l_i:::::ii::::::i:ii:::::
Y,r ',, :, ,, .. :, :t ,l ., 'l :, :l ., ., :, ,i .. .l ;t .li "i :* ,. :. 1, ry" ;"t :, ",
'
i;l,,lllll+itltlll,iri,r,..".l,..,,::,,r,,,r,,,,,;; lW,::. ljw:
\;,.2
O.,
, - ?lr -1. 4N .r/r1 & \I ': .; .f | ä,r i, i, wt &,, i. tW t |, r fr fr. i, , I ' WWt. ,: :, . ft ,a Äta t, ):. Jt Lt:' ,: , ?:: . .' :). :. ': Mi .1: t Wat, 4t, .: :|. ', f . f' 2 i..: i |' l: .;: &? .I ": ii: :: :" : . ,. :L% t: .:. . *: ...: , : . i.. ' f: .: , f.. i :..'
ffif4/tW,ivg,rytt."t' ',
tlffill 'ffii:t ::ffi
' ,' W :!r;,ffi.i:::,& .:-, #,,i,,&,-.,,,:,,r:,,,:,,.,, :,,,,t,, ..,,.,,.,, ,
Wm*,äi'uir*l*,,,,,
' i' ä1 li : .t,;,W: ffi|.. r,,.,, .," .:t .,, ,t ,:, ::, i:. it :li 'i, :if :if iii .i :l, il. ii, ;:, i, 'i:, ' ,,,,ritii:,i ii=. ' "":'" ' -'
.. :. :1 '1 :,jf :fi :. i: r.. i. +t.t. ;t :tt ,t iW .:: :. ::: '. :, 11'i ,: i': it ,lt :it i: r:, ,t ,i: ,t ,i: ,/ :ff ,ii ,' ' :,,, il im :it ii l: ,' :i: :' :W :iYi:'i ' '
lt..S
Urotrichafarcta (5, fiom KAHL 1930; 6, fiom LIEBMANN 1962; 7, 9, fiom DRAGESCO et aI. 1974;8, the synonym IJrotritha purt'ula
PENARD 1922; 10-15, from FOISSNER et al. 1994. 5-8, in vivo; 9, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation; 10-15, silver carbonate
impregnation). 5-8: Lateral views, length without caudal cilium 20-30 pm. 9: Oblique anterior polar view. Identification uncertain be-
cause only one adoral organelle (AO) was observed. 10, 11: Ciliary pattem of right and left side of same specimen. The oral basket is filled
with extrusomes (black rods; cp. Fig. 15), which are difficult to recognize in live cells. Note that, as in other llrotricha species, ciliary rows
are shortened posteriorly by about 30 Vo (anowheads). Anows mark tiny adoral organelles (brosse). 1.2, 15: Ventral and right lateral views
showing ciliary pattern, adoral organelles (arrows), and nuclear apparatus. 13: Oblique posterior polar view. The posterior pofüon of (Iro-
tricha species is unciliated, except for the caudal cilium. 14: Anterior polar view showing undulating membrane composed of 9-14 circu-
larly arranged, paired, short cilia (arrows), the so-called oral flaps. AO (OA in 14) = adoral organelles, CA = caudal cilium, CR = ciliary
rows,CV=contractilevacuole,E=extrusomes,FV=foodvacuole,MA=macronucleus,Ml=micronucleus,OF=oralflaps,UM=un-
dulating membrane (oral flaps).
354



Prostom atida
Urotrichafarcta (27-30, original scanning electron micrographs ofcultivated specimens fiom a pond in Tuebingen, Germany; culture obtained
by D. H. LYNN). 27 r 28,30: Ventral and anterior polar views showing details of the oral apparatus, which is in the anterior pole cenffe. The un-
dulating membrane is composed of so-called oral flaps, each consisting of two short cilia and an extrusome sac at the cytostomial side; thus,
each flap is composed of three minute bristles. The brosse consists of three (rarely two, Fig. 30) minute ciliary rows (adoral organelles) sepa-
rated from each other by distinct ridges; the brosse cilia (arrows) are very short and slightly inflated distally. 29: Posterior polar view showing
the unciliated pole region occupied by a single caudal cilium and the excretory pore of the contractile vacuole. AO = adoral organelles, CA =
caudal cilium, EP = excrctory pore ofcontractile vacuole, N = nematodesmata (oral basket rods), OF = oral flaps, R = brosse ridges.
356

Prostom atida
U rotricha globo sa scHEwrAKoFF, I 892
1892 Urotricha globosa SCHEWIAKOFF, Verh. naturh.-med. Ver. Heidelb., 4: 553 (without illustration but with
sufficient diagnosis).
1893 Urotricha globosa SCHEWIAKOFF,Zap. imp. Akad. Nauk,41: 33 (again described as new species; with
illustration).
l93O Urotricha globosa SCHEWIAKOFF, 1893 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 59 (revision).
1989 Urotricha globosa SCHEWIAKOFF, 1893 - SONG & WILBERT, Lauterbornia, 3: 10 (redescription from
life and after silver impregnation).
1994 Urotricha globosa SCHEWIAKOFF, 1892 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte
des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, U94: 360 ("Ciliate-Atlas", i.e. taxonomic and ecological
monograph).
Differential diagnosi
s
1) Size in vivo about 18-25 x 15-25 pm.
2) Body globular, unciliated posterior portion not set off plug-like from body proper (Fig. 1-3).
3) Macronucleus globular, near mid-body (Fig. 1,2,5).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end, slightly eccentric (Fig. 2, 5).
5) Extrusomes short and fine and thus difficult to recognize in vivo (Fig. 2).
6) 17-25 meridional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by about 20 Vo.lnvariably I caudal cilium of body length
(Fig. 1-4,6).
7) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous in vivo. Undulating membrane circular, consists
of short, paired cilia forming about 13 digitate processes (oral flaps) around oral opening. Three serially ar-
ranged, tiny adoral organelles (brosse; Fig.2,4-6; details of oral ciliature recognizable only after silver im-
pregnation).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of fast forward swimming interrupted by wide jumps.
Similar species
Easily recognizable as [Jrotricha because of the characteristic, jumping movement and the single caudal cilium
(do not confuse with Cyclidium spp., which show the same features!). The globular shape separates U. globosa
from the other small species of the genus, especially -+ Urotricha farcta, treated in this book. In spite of this, spe-
cies determination needs silver impregnation because there are several species (for example, U. ristoi KRAINER,
1995, Urotricha nais MUNIOZ et al., 1987), which differ mainly in details of the oral apparatus (3 vs. 2 adoral or-
ganelles,numberof oral flaps).tJrotrichaondinaMUNOZetal., 1989 NrdU.viteaMARTINEZetal., 1985,
two poorly described species, lack extrusomes. [Jrotricha sphaerica GROLIERE, 191]ais about twice the size
and has distinctly more (about 60) ciliary rows. -) Urotricha furcata has two caudal cilia. I , 2, 5, 7 (3 adoral or-
ganelles) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Pelagic and (rarely) benthic in stagnant and slowly running waters. The locus clas-
sicus is between Napier and Tarawera, New Zealand, where SCHEWIAKOFF (1892, 1893) discovered Urotricha
globosa among algae of a forest marsh in early September; it reproduced very well in putrefying samples. SONG
& WILBERT (1989; Fig. 2-6) found high numbers of U. globosa in a eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) of
Bonn, Germany, in September and February.
351

Prostomatida
Records not substantiated by illustrations: mesosaprobic waters in Belgium (BERVOETS 1940); ponds in Estonia
during summer (JACOBSON 1928);); ponds in Switzerland (MERMOD 1914, ROUX 1901); about 200 ind.11 in
the surface layer of a eutrophic reservoir in Azerbaijan (ALEKPEROV 1984a); eutrophic pond in China during
autumn and winter (GONG 1986). GAJEWSKAJA (1933) found some up to 60 pm large specimens (Urotricha
sphaerica?) in Lake Baikal.
Records from brackish waters in Belgium (VERSCHAFFELT 1930) and from the interstitial of the Waltair coast,
Indian Ocean (RAO & GANAPATI 1968), not substantiated by illustrations.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on bacteria, small algae, and organic debris (RIGGEN-
BACH 1922, SCHEWIAKOFF 1893). Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens about 7 mg (FOISSNER et al.
1994). Reliably recorded from Europe and New Zealand, indicating global distribution. Very likely more common
than indicated by literature data. Possibly holo-euryhaline. Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et al.
(1994): betamesosaprobic (b ='7 , a = 3,1 = 4, SI = 2.3).
cRa;
CR
UM
OB
AO :....
4
Urotricha globosa (1, tiom KAHL 1930, redrawn fiom SCHEWIAKOFF 1893; 2-6, tiom SONG & WILBERT l9tJ9. I-3, in vivo; 4, 5, pro-
targol impregnation; 6, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation). 1, 2': Laterul views of floating specimens, [8 pm, 20 pm. Note globular
shape (species name!). 3: Specimen packed with food vacuoles. 4: Anterior polar view of ora.l and somatic ciliary pattem. Note the three tiny
adoral organelles. 5: Oral apparatus, nuclear apparatus, and contractile vacuole. Note the prominent oral basket, which is difficult to recognize
in live specimens (Fig. 1, 2). 6z Ciliary pattem and silverline system. The direct-connecting silverline system connects the basal bodies of the
ciliary rows and has short, horizontal branches; the indirect-connecting silverline system is reticular. The undulating membrane is circular
(Fig. 4) and consists of short, paired cilia forming digitate processes called oral flaps. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CA = caudal cilium,
CR=ciliaryrows,CV=contractilevacuole,E=extrusomes,EP=excretoUporeofcontractilevacuole,MA=macronucleus,Ml=micronu-
cleus, OB = oral basket, OF = oral flaps, SS = silverline system, UM = undulating membrane (oral flaps, circumoral ciliary row).
358

Prostom atida
Urotricha platystoma sroKES, 1886
1886 Urotricha plaQstoma STOKES, Ann. Mag. nat. Hist., ll:101.
1927 Urotricha armata KAHL, Arch. Protistenk., 60: 64 (new synonym, -+ taxonomy).
1930 Urotricha armata KAHL, 1927 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 60 (revision).
1984 Urotricha armata KAHL, 1921 - FOISSNER, Schweiz. Z. Hydrol.,46: 2ll (redescription from life and af-
ter silver impregnation).
1989 Urotricha corlissiana SONG & WILBERT, Lauterbomia,3: 16 (synonym according to FOISSNER et al.
1994).
1994 Urotricha armata KAHL, 1921 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer.
Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, U94:362 ("Ciliate-Atlas", i.e. taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Nomenclature and Taxonomy
After careful consideration, we decided to synonymize Urotricha armata KAHL with U. platystoma STOKES.
KAHL (1930) himself supposed synonymy, but maintained both species. Very likely, the cortical warts of Urotri-
cha platystomd are extrusomes, which are rather conspicuous in this species (and in U. armata, Fig. 2,5) and ap-
pear as bright dots in surface view. STOKES (1886b) and many other workers at the turn of the century did not
recognize the unciliated posterior body portion, which is, compared to other Urotricha species, indeed rather in-
conspicuous in U . platystoma (only 15 7o of body length vs. 3O 7o in most congeners).
Urotricha lemani FOISSNER et al., 1994 is a replacement name for Urotricha armata DRAGESCO, 1p60 (p. 61),
a junior primary homonym. The synonym, Urotricha corlissiana agrees very well with the original description of
Urotricha armata KAHL, which was not discussed by SONG & WILBERT (1989); they compared their popula-
tion only with Urotricha armqta KAHL sensu DRAGESCO et al. (1974), which is, however, a misidentification;
FOISSNER (1984a) established Urotricha dragescoi for this population (Fig. 8, 13; see also "similar species").
Dilierential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 30-55 x 2G-35 pm.
2) Body broadly ellipsoidal, often slightly narrowed posteriorly, unciliated posterior portion, however, not set off
plugJike from body proper (Fig. 1-5).
3) Macronucleus globular, near mid-body (Fig. 2,5,9).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end, slightly eccenffic (Fi9.2,5).
5) Extrusomes 3-5 pm long, slightly fusiform, produce rather distinct peripheral fringe (Fig. 1-5, 10, 11).
6) 35-5 1 , usually abott 42 meridional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by only about 15 7o . Invariably 1 elon-
gated caudal cilium (Fig. 5,9,14,17, 18).
1) Oralopening at anterior end of cell, oral basket inconspicuous in vivo. Undulating membrane circular, consists
of short, paired cilia forming digitate processes (oral flaps) around oral opening. Three serially arranged, small
adoral organelles (brosse; Fig.2, 5, 6,9, 14, 15, 19; details of oral ciliature recognizable only after silver im-
pregnation and not necessary for identification).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of moderately fast forward swimming intemrpted by wide jumps at ir-
regular intervals.
359

Prostomatida
Similar species
Easily recognizable as Urotricha because of the characteristic, jumping movement and the single caudal cilium
(do not confuse with Cyclidium spp., which show the same features!). Urotricha dragescoi (-+ taxonomy) is plug-
like narrowed posteriorly, has a reniform macronucleus, and possesses another brosse structure (Fig. 8, l3). -->
Urotrichafarcta, Urotricha ovata KAHL, 1926, and -+ U.furcata (2 caudal cilia!) are smaller (<30 pm), have in-
conspicuous, minute (about2 pm) extrusomes, and <25 clliary rows. Note that there are several similar species in
the Urotricha group with more than two caudal cilia (see Table by genus introduction). 2 (posterior end not set off
plug-like), 5 (in live cells rather distinct peripheral fringe of extrusomes), 6 (1 caudal cilium) are key characters for
identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Usually sparse in the mud, aufwuchs, and pelagial of stagnant and running waters
throughout the year. Locus classicus is likely near Trenton, New Jersey, USA, where STOKES (1886b) discov-
ered Urotricha platystoma in a Sphagnum potd. Locus classicus of the synonym Urotricha armata is a city brook
in Hamburg, Germany, where it occurred mainly in spring (KAHL 1927a, l93O} SONG & WILBERT (1989)
found few specimens of the synonym U. corlissiana in the summer plankton of a eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer
Weiher) in Bonn, Germany. FOISSNER (1984a) collected few specimens of U. platystoma in a floodplain pond
near the village of Bierbaum, Lower Austria, in early November. VUXANOVICI (1962a) found many specimens
in a clean sample from a lake in Romania (Fig. 1).
Further records from stagnant and slowly running waters: plankton of a small, meromictic lake in Upper Austria
(NAUWERCK 1996); hypertrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria (BLATTERER 1989); alphameso-
saprobic to polysaprobic lentic area of the Drau River, Austria (FOISSNER 1984a); wet mosses from Czechoslo-
vakia (TIRJAKOVÄ & MATIS 1987); ox-bow of Danube River in Slovakia (MATIS & TIRJAKOVÄ 1994b);
common and very abundant (590000 ind. I r) in flagellate-rich road puddles of Bavaria, Germany (DINGFELDER
1962, Fig. 3; identification likely incorrect, U. ovata?); benthic in clear, mesosaprobic ponds of Germany (KAHL
1930); with low abundance in the mud of the Hamburg Harbour, Germany (BARTSCH & HARTWIG 1984); res-
ervoir with 1.1-5.4 mg l-r BOD5 in Spain (FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS et al. 1990).
Records from running waters: with low abundance in beta- to alphamesosaprobic rivers of Upper Austria and Ba-
varia throughout the year with a frequency maximum during winter and spring (FOISSNER & MOOG 1992,
FOISSNER et al. 1992a, b); clean Illach River in Bavaria, Germany (FOISSNER 199'7); littoral of mesosaprobic
Danube River in Hungary (TIRIAKOV A LSSZ); with low abundance in mesosaprobic brooks in northem Italy
(MADONI & GHETTI 1980, 1981); with low abundance and up to 25 7o frequency in the seston of a mesosa-
probic river in Poland (HUL 1987); with low abundance and frequency in the Sphaerotilus community of a Polish
river (HUL 1986).
CZAPIK & JORDAN (1916) recorded Urotricha platystoma from brackish water (3J Voo) atthe Baltic Sea coast
near Gdansk. Marine records not substantiated by illustrations (CAREY & MAEDA 1985).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Very likely mainly feeds on small ciliates. Biomass of 106, speci-
mens about 15 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1994) to 22mg (NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991). Lower pH limit
4.7 (BICK & DREWS 1973). Reliably recorded from Europe and the USA. Benthic and pelagic in lake§, ponds
and rivers. Eurythermic and possibly holo-euryhaline. In stagnant waters, Urotricha platystoma very likely indi-
cates eutrophic conditions, especially when abundance is high (>1000 ind. l'). Saprobic classification according to
FOISSNER et al. (1994): alphamesosaprobic (b = 2, a = 8, I = 4,SI = 2.8).
360

Prostomatida
F
I
6
8
OB
\re
CR
1,.
MA
11
20 um
Urotricha platystoma U, fiom VUXANOYICI 1962a;2, fiom KAHL 1930; 3, fiom DINGFELDER 1,962;4,6,7, ll, tiom SONG & WIL-
BERT 1989; 5, 9, 10, from FOISSNER 1984q' 12, from STOKES 1886b. 1-5, 7, lFl2, in vivo; 6, 9, protargol impregnation). l-5, 7: Lateral
views, 30-55 pm (Fig. 3 very likely shows Urotricha ovata). 6t Ciliary pattem in ventral anterior half. 9: Ciliary pattem (schematic) of ventral
side, 32 pm. 10, ll: Resting and ejected extrusomes. L2:Lateralview,32 pm. STOKES very likely overlooked the unciliated posterior body
porlion, which is rather inconspicuous (15 Vo ofbody length) in this species. The "minute hemispherical elevations arranged in longitudinal se-
ries" are obviously extrusomes in surface view. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CA = caudal cilium, CR = ciliary rows, CV = contractile
vacuole, E = exüusomes, EP = excretory pore, FG = colourless and yellowish fat globules 1-7 pm across, MA = macronucleus, MI = micro-
nucleus, OB = oral basket, OF = oral flaps, UM = undulating membrane (oral flaps).
Urotricha dragescoi (from DRAGESCO et al. 1974, --> taxonomy). 8: Ciliary pattem of anterior end after Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate im-
pregnation. 13: Lateral view in vivo, length 47-55 pm.
361

Prostomatida
15
aa
=AO /CrR\
SS
SS
-
16
Urotricha platystoma ll4, 11 , from FOISSNER 1984a; 15, 16, from SONG & WILBERT 1989; 18, 19, tr"om FOISSNER
et al,. 1994. 14, 17 , Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation; 15, protargol impregnation; 16, Klein-Foissner silver nitrate
impregnation; 18, 19, scanning electron micrographs). 14, 15: Oblique ventral and lateral views showing somatic and oral
ciliary pattern. Urotricha platystoma invariable has three rather conspicuous adoral organelles (AO), which form the so-
called brosse. 16: The direct-connecting silverline system connects the basal bodies of the ciliary rows, the indirect-
connecting system is reticular. 17: Oblique posterior polar view of ciliary pattem and silverline system (shown only in un-
ciliated area). 18: Lateral view. Arrow marks densely ciliated oral area. 19: The oral opening is surrounded by short, paired
cilia, the oral flaps, which form the undulating membrane (circumoral ciliary row). AO = adoral organelles, CA = caudal
cilium, CR = ciliary rows, E = extrusomes, EP = excretory pore of contractile vacuole, OF = oral flaps, OO = oral opening,
SS = silverline system.
362

Prostomatida
Balanion planctonicum (ForssNER, oLEKSrv & MüLLER, 1ee0) ForssNER, BERGER& KOH-
MANN, 1994
1990 Pseudobalanion planctonicumFolssNER, OLEKSIV & MIILLER, Arch. Protistenk., 138 : 192.
1994 Balanion planctoniczm (FOISSNER, OLEKSIV & MÜLLER, 1990) - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOH-
MANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 1194:369(combining authors;
"Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
1999 Balanion planctonicaric - BARDELE, Europ. J. Protistol., 35: 17 (ultrastructure and morphogenesis).
Taxonomy
FOISSNER et al. (1990) did not find adoral organelles and thus established the genus Pseudobalanion for this spe-
cies. However, electron microscopic investigations on the type population showed that it has, llke Balanion (Fig. 8),
very tiny adoral organelles inside of the undulating membrane (BARDELE 1992, 7999; Fig. 7). Thus, FOISSNER
et al. (1994) synonymized Pseudobalanion with Balanion WULFF, 19L9. Balanion comatum, the type species, dif-
fers from B. planctonicum, according to JAKOBSEN & MONTAGNES (1999), by the number of basal bodies in
the somatic ciliary rows (12-26 vs. 7-12) and the number of microtubules in the oral flaps (9 vs. 4).
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 10-22 x 10*20 1rm, usually about 20 x 15 trrm.
l
2) Body bursiforrrl, that is, anterior end transversely truncated, posterior
broadly rounded (Fig. 1,2,6). ffi ,. ,.:s lN ,S" ffi- E
W:1ffi i$
3) Macronucleus globular, near mid-body (Fig. 2,3).
4) Contractile vacuole distinctly subterminal and eccentric (Fig . 2, 3, l).
s) Extrusomes not rec ognizable in vivo, after silver impregnation and in
the electron microscope mainly associated with the oral flaps (Fig. l,
3).
6) 2l-28, usually 24 mendional ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by al-
most 50 7o. Invariably 1 caudal cilium of body length (Fig. I,2,3,5, 6).
,,:i
7) Oral opening occupies anterior end of cell, oral basket very inconspic-
uous. Undulating membrane circular, consists of long, paired cilia "'i',iü
,,...,.l:ll
forming digitate processes (oral flaps) around oral opening. Two tiny itNi'',"
ii..,.,...,,,.
{
adoral organelles (brosse) inside of the undulating membrane (Fig. 1, r
2, 5, l; adoral organelles recognizable only with the electron micro-
Balanion planctonicum (original). l: Lat-
scope and not necessary for identification).
eral view of a protargol-impregnated speci-
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of very fast spinning inter- men from the type population. CA = caudal
rupted by wide jumps at irregular intervals. Specimens with con- cilium, CR = strongly shortened ciliary
tracted oral opening (Fig. 4) move with posterior end directed rows, E = extrusomes in long oral flaps.
forward.
Similar species
Easy to identify due to the small size and the long oral flaps surrounding the broadly truncated anterior end. The
type species of the genus, B. comatum WULFF, is marine and more densely ciliated (-+ Taxonomy). -+ Urotricha
species, some of which are also very small, have short (about 3 pm) oral flaps, the adoral organelles outside the un-
dulating membrane, and are not broadly truncated but rounded anteriorly. Several genera rather similar to B. planc-
tonicum in size, shape, and oral apparatus have been described, namely Lagynurus MANSFELD, Nannophrya
363

Prostomatida
KAHL, Peridion VUXANOVICI, and Peridionella VUXANOVICI. However, all have unshortened ciliary rows.
l, 2, 6 (posterior halfunciliated), 7 (long oral flaps at broad anterior end) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in the pelagial of lakes, reservoirs, and ponds. Often rather abundant, es-
pecially during spring, that is, concomitantly with the first phytoplankton peak (FOISSNER 1994; -+ Ecogram a).
Table I. Annual mean abundance and biomass of. P.planctonicum in the pelagic zone of Lake
Constance at different depths, compared with the data of the entire ciliate community, 1987-1989
Annual mean abundance Annual mean biovolume
(cells/ml) (mm3/m3)
Alt Pseud. o//o AII Pseud . %
ciliates pl anct. Ps. pl. ciliates planct. Ps. pl .
1987 0-4 m 10.7 4.2 39% \29 s.5 4.2%
4-8 m 9.3 3.1 33% 133 4.0 3.0%
8-20 m 4.7 1.0 2r% 69 1.3 t.9%
50m 1.4 0.08 6% t4 0.1 0.7%
0.08
140 m 2.0 0.06 3% 15 0.5%
1988 0-8 m L7.2 6.1 35% 190 7.9 4.2%
8-20 m 8.5 2.9 34% 92 3.8 4.1%
50m 2.2 0.2 9% 15 0.26 1.7%
140 m 2.8 0.2 7% 15 0.26 1.7%
1989 0-8 m 18.0 8.0 44% t75 10.4 5.9%
8-20 m 9.6 4.1 43% 87 5.3 6.1%
30m 3.2 0.6 r8% In 1989, the abundance in
40m 2.8 0.2 8% 30-100 m are mean values
50m 2.6 0.3 t1% from five sampling days: April
75m 3.3 0.2 s% 18; May 2; June 20; July 25;
100 m 2.4 0.1 2% September 19
Table II. Mean cell volumes, intrinsic growth ratei (r^) and generation times (G) of P.planctonicum
determined in the temperature experiment
I/tSD
Temperature t Growth rates (duy-t) G (h)
("c) (pm') (days)
Reg
5.5 l20t t 323 7 0.44 0.52 0.43 0.46 36
r 0.85 0.83
9 1269 400 4 0.76 0.88 20
12 14t9 + 313 4 1.01 0.96 0.91 0.94 18
+ 1.19 1.24
15.5 1236 334 3 1.26 1.32 t3
18.5 1437 + 416 2 1.55 1.56 t.4t 1,.52 I 1
2t.5 Lethal
r, period of logarithmic growth; 1, 2, 3, growth rates calculated from single cultures; Reg, growth
rates calculated from the slopes of regression lines.
Table III. Data from the Srazing experiment: mean con;ntrations of Psezdo balanion and Rhodomonas, nean aliate volumes t standard deviation, ciliate
growth rates (r), R rodomonas grazing loss rates (g), ingestios rates (f) given as cells ingested per ciliate and hour, and as % cell volume ingested per ciliate
volume and hour, and gross growth efficiency (GGE) expressed as % ciliate volume yielded per volume of ingested prey
Day Rhodomonas Pseudobalanion Day r I I / GGE
no. (cells ml-t) (*1r-il-) (pm'cell-r) no. (duy-t) (duy-') (cells Cil.-r h-') (% p*' pm-3 6-t; (%)
20 1 2 1L 672 ,,, 490 00N 00 21 53 07 52 11 1 56 7 27 4 26 5 t++ + 34 4 93 3 55 t 0 2 3r-. - -21 3 001 ... 590 321 440 ... 223 224 004 ... 494 8 1l93 2t75
4 0 t
3 16,100 432 t457 * 321. 4-5 0.42 0.32 0.4 8 ?,4
74 5 1 264 , ,, 5 43 300 300 06 9 85 04 88 33 1 11 85 22 93 54 96 62 +!+ 23 3 85 4 08 6 65 7-- -76 000 0 41. .3 2 106 4 20 1. .. .9 2 Wr89 0 0. .5 2 t2 5 25 t
6 4 04 11 2 .3 4 7 8 -- .. 2
8 50 724 672 + 218 8-9 -4.07 0.71
9 30 668 574 + 242
Tables I-lll fiom MULLER ( l99l )
364

Prostomatida
Locus classicus of Balanion planctonicum is Lake Constance where it contributed 3445 7o to the total ciliate
abundance during 0-20m in 1987-1989 (FOISSNER etal.7990, MÜLLER 1991, -+ Table I, Ecogram a, and
Ecogram a by -+ Histiobalantium bodamicum).
Records largely not substantiated by illustrations: with high dominance (up to 53 Eo of total ciliate abundance) in
an oligo- to mesotrophic lake (Piburger See) of Austria (MACEK etaL.1996, SIUBK etaL.1996, SOMMARUGA
& PSENNER 1993); mesotrophic alpine lake (Mondsee) in Austria, mainly during spring (SALBRECHTER &
ARNDT 1994); small, meromictic lake (Höllerersee) in Austria (NAUWERCK 1996); sparse in the eutrophic
pond at Salzburg University (FOISSNER, unpubl.); occasionally dominant in a mesotrophic, alkaline lake (Neus-
iedler See) of Austria, where it accounted, together with -+ Urotricha furcata, for about 46 Eo of total ciliate num-
bers in spring and June (SCHÖNBERGER 1994); eutrophic Rimov Reservoir in Czech Republic (MACEK 1994);
oligo- to mesotrophic lake Pavin in France (CARRIAS et al. 1996); 19 7o of annual mean ciliate abundance in a
eutrophic lake (Belauer See) of northern Germany, especially during spring and autumn (ZIMMERMANN 1994,
1995); with an annual mean of up to 8030 ind. lr (G-8 m, year 1989) in the meso- to euffophic Lake Constance,
Germany, where it contributed 75_90 Vo of the total ciliate abundance in March (MÜLLER 1989, MÜLLER et al.
1991, SCHWEIZER 1994; turther records from this lake: CLEVEN 1996, WEISSE 199I, WEISSE & MÜLLER
1990, 1998); with a weighted annual mean of tp to 623 ind. l-' (maximum abundance 6500 ind. f r) in two lakes of
southem Chile, with peaks in May and especially during June and Oclober (WÖLFL 1996).
Freshwater records of Balanion sp., which very likely refer to B. planctonicum: eulrophic urban lake in Vienna,
Austria (MAYER et aL. 1991); eutrophic ÄJmov Reservoir, Czech Republic (SIMEK et al. 1995); surface layer
(1-5 m) of a humic lake in the Massif Central, France (AMBLARD et al. 1995, CARRIAS et al. 1994); common
in Lake Huron and Lake Michigan, USA (CARRICK & FAHNENSTIEL 1990); epilimnion of Lake Ontario,
Canada (TAYLOR & JOHANNSSON 1991); acidic (pH 4.94.9) Bowland Lake, Canada (KELLER et'al.lgg}).
FENCHEL et al. (1995) recorded Balanion planctonicum from a Danish Fjord at a depth of 9 m, that is, about 7 m
above the anoxic deep water (but see the redescription of B. comatum by JAKOBSEN & MONTAGNES 1999).
Autecological data: Feeds Rhodomonas sp. (FOISSNER et al. 1990) and bacteria (SOMMARUGA & PSEN-
NER 1993). Depending on food concentration,0.24.4 Rhodomonas cells ciliate-r h-r were ingested (-+ Table III,
Ecogram c); globutar specimens packed with up to 8 Rhodomonas cells have been observed (MÜLLER l99l).
Optimal food size 8-12pm (MÜLLER 1991). §IMEK et al. (1996) estimated agrazing rate (mean t SD) of
8 + 12 bacteria cell-r h-l and 0.2t1cyanobacteria ciliate-' h'r; clearance rates were 4 nl ciliate-r h-r for bacteria
and 3 nl ciliate-l h-r for cyanobacteria; 66 %o of specimens ingested algae >2 pm. ZIMMERMANN (1994) found
a distinct preference for 3-5 pm-sized particles over 0,2-2;rm-sized ones; for I pm-sized particles she found an
ingestion rate of 350-400 particles ciliate-r h-r and a clearance rate of 2.1-3.1 pl ciliate-' h-', which is very differ-
ent to the data of §fUef et al. (1996) mentioned above. KENTER et al. (1996) observed an ingestion rate of
1.6-1.7 Rhodomonas cells ciliate-r ht; 20-30 min elapsed between ingestion and egestion. CLEVEN (1996; in-
correctly spelled Balanion planktonicum on p. 435) found that B. planctonicum does not or to an extremely low
degree feed on indirectly fluorescent-labelled flagellates, and CARRIAS et al. (1996) found no uptake of fluores-
bite plain microspheres 0.5 pm across. Using the lowest ingestion rate of B. planctonicum on Rhodomonas (0.2
cells ciliate'l h-r) determined by MÜLLER (1991), SOMMARUGA & PSENNER (1993) estimated that it can in-
gest 438 Rhodomonas cells ml-l d-r at its maximum abundance of 91 ind. ml-r in the Piburger See.
Lake Constance populations reproduced only at <21" C (-+ Ecogram b); maximum growth rates increased from
0.46 d I ar 5.5o C to 1.52 d-' at 18.5o C (-+ Table II and Ecogram b, MÜLLER & GELLER 1993). SOMMA-
RUGA & PSENNER (1993) found B. planctonicum in the Piburger See (Austria) at22.5" C, and MACEK et al.
(1996) estimated a growth rate of 0.65!0.32dt at9.5-16.5oC for this population. Biomass of 106 specimens
0.85 mg (CARRIAS et al. 1996; fixed cells); 1.1 t 0.5 mg (mean t SD; MACEK et al. 1996; fixed cells); on aver-
age I.3 mg (MÜf-f-nR 1991). MÜLLER (1991) found a rather high variability in body length, namely 10-22pm
(n = 60) over a three months period (February to April), corresponding a biomass of 0.3-3.6 mg per 106
specimens. Balanion planctonicum is distinctly suppressed when Daphnia dominates (JÜRGENS et al. 1994).
365

Prostomatida
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Europe only, but probably common in cold (<22' C) lakes world-
wide. In the old literature, Balanion planctonicum was very likely not separated from small Urotricha spp. because
of its rather similar general appearance. Euplanktonic. Common throughout the year, dominant, however, usually
during spring. Feeds on nanophytoplankton and bacteria. Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et al.
(1994): oligosaprobic (o =7,b = 3, I = 4, SI = 1.3).
100
o//o
600
§GI
400
tn I
o
'=OIJJ
13
ZOO
0 E l-s
(U
o
a- ,/
E,
1000 ä
1.0
cC,-r J,/{
800 . t: nJ
'eC
c05
/
§(\a
600
q
(U
r03LJ
100
100 10'
o//o
0
1000 1d
E
VI
800 (U
L.,
10'
t
ooo
vt
o,
b qoo
10'
200
c
0 a 10 1 2 3 L 5 b 7 8 gdoys
Ecograms of Balanion planctonicum (fiom MÜLLER l99l). a: Seasonality in Lake Constance, Germany, <luring l9ti7-1989. Upper panel:
percent contribution to total ciliate numbers. Lower panel: abundance per squarc metre in 0*20 m depth. Black and white areas indicate cell
numbers above and below 8 m depth respectively. b: Intrinsic growth rates rm versus temperature. Soiid circles and vertical bars = mean and
range of growth rates determined experimentally (-+ Table II). Regression line according to: r, = 0.063 1 0.078 t. Open circles = intrinsic
growth rates calculated for a cell volume of 1300 pm3 according to FINLAY 1977. * = maximum growth rate of a field population as observed
in Lake Constance during spring 1988. c: Changes in concentration of B. planctoniczm (squares) and Rhodomonas (circles) during a grazing
experiment. Open circles = Rhodomonas in the controls. Vertical bars indicate the range observed in three parallel cultures (no vertical bar =
range smaller than diameter of symbol). Crosses = mean numbers of heterotrophic nanoflagellates.
366



Prostomatida
Longitricha puytoraci 1onecssco, rF'roDE & FRvD-vERSAVEL, 1974) ForssNER &
PFISTER, I997
1974 Urotricha puytoraci DRAGESCO, IFTODE & FRYD-VERSAVEL, Protistologica, I0: 72 (see taxono-
mv).
1997 Longitricha puytoraci (DRAGESCO, IFTODE & FRRYD-VERSAVEL, 1974) - FOISSNER & PFIS-
TER, Limnologica, 21: 312 (combining authors; reinvestigation of type slides).
Taxonomy
DRAGESCO et al. (1974) described Urotricha puytoraci from silver-impregnated specimens and without de-
tailed morphometry. Thus, redescription from live material is necessary, especially to obtain more detailed data
about shape, colour, and extrusomes. FOISSNER & PFISTER (1997), who reinvestigated the type slides, largely
confirmed the original description. They found that Urotricha puytoraci is slightly broader than long, which is
very unusual in prostome ciliates. This peculiarity and the lack of caudal cilia match Longitricha GAJEWSKA-
JA, 1933 (Fig.5), to which U. puytoraci was thus transferred.
D i f f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (from silver-impregnated specimens)
1) Size 36-59 x39-62 pm (in vivo thus probably about 50 x 55 pm).
2) Body almost globular, on average, however, cells are slightly broader than long. Unciliated, posterior portion
broadly rounded and, except for a few specimens, not distinctly set off plug-like from ciliated part. Anterior
region flat or, in about half of specimens, even slightly concave (Fig. l, 2, 6).
3) Macronucleus reniform.
4) Excretory pore of contractile vacuole slightly out of posterior pole centre (Fig. 1).
s) Extrusomes likely lacking or inconspicuous because not recognizable in silver-impregnated specimens.
6) 48-51 longitudinal ciliary rows shortened posteriorly by about 25 Vo.No caudal cilia (Fig. 1,2,6-13).
1) Oral opening at anterior end of cell, oral basket broad, extends to posterior third of cell. Undulating mem-
brane circular, length and structure of oral flaps not known. Three serially and obliquely arranged adoral or-
ganelles (brosse), each composed of 3-6 dikinetids (Fig. 1-4, 6-l 1; further details of oral ciliature recogniz-
able only after silver impregnation and not necessar:y for identification).
8) Movement not known.
Similar species
Longiticha flava GAJEWSKAJA, 1933, type of the genus, is larger (about 75-100 pm) and has a brown pig-
mentation (Fig. 5). Easily confused with [Jrotricha sphaerica GROLIERE, 1977, which is very similar in all re-
spects, except for the single caudal cilium. Other large -+ Urotricha species usually have many conspicuous cau-
dal cilia and a distinct peripheral extrusome fringe. -+ Bursellopsis (larger) and -+ Pelagothrix species have a
ciliated posterior pole. l, 2 (globular), 6 (caudal cilia lacking) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Not very common, possibly confined to the pelagial of small water bodies. Locus
classicus is Ballancourt, a suburb of Paris, France, where DRAGESCO et al. (1974) discovered Longitricha puy-
toraci in a pond. MIRABDULLAEV (1988, 1989) found it in fish ponds of Tashkent, Uzbekistan, with peak
abundances in late spring.
368

Prostomatida
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on Cryptomonas sp. (DRAGESCO et al. 1914). Biomass
of 106 medium-sized specimens about 65 mg (our calculations). Reliably recorded only from France; possible
more common than indicated by literature dala because very likely sometimes confused with + Urotricha spe-
cies or designated as "Urotricha sp."
AO
CR<
:
.1.'i 2
iri\"
il\
:j
i't. .uM
DG-'
,
a
I
I
5
CV
Longitricha puytoraci (1, 3, fiom DRAGESCO et al. 1974;2,4, from FOISSNER & PFISTER 1997, drawn tiom type
slides. 1-4, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation). 1: Ciliary pattem of ventral side, about 50 pm long. Longitricha dif-
fers from -+ Urotricha by the lack ofcaudal cilia and in that body width is slightly greater than body length.2,3: Anterior
polar views of oral and somatic ciliary pattern. Arrow in (3) denotes adoral organelles (brosse). Each ciliary row begins with
a double granule (cp. Fig. 4). 4: Detail of oral ciliature. Arrow marks adoral organelles (brosse), each composed of 3-6 diki-
netids; arrowhead denotes pharyngeal pores (cp. Fig. 10). AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CR = ciliary rows, DG = paired
(double) granules at anterior end of ciliary rows, EP = excretory pore of contractile vacuole, OO = oral opening, SS = silver-
line system, UM = circular undulating membrane.
Longitricha flava from Lake Baikal (from GAJEWSKAJA 1933). 5: Lateral view in vivo, about 75 pm long. Arrow marks
reniform macronucleus. CV = contractile vacuole.
369

Prostom atrda
::: :::::_ .t:::.t ..:t :.::. : :::
ffiffi,",,,,,
t'flf.iti.tt:t:til:ti:.i.:fWfii.)ält.lattriMAäijlr.. ffii/A/&,fifNi.i(i:;r,Affiäjififffi.iiitftf:ii:t:tt|t##i.t;t:t:it#:t.i;ftfti|;t:itftftit:ttjiß:itTt..iii:ttt:ttt|tiÄttl
W it;tii::Wr.;.t!tilwia.i.tä.,ttlt.iW.ffiL.tirftf;fi,ffffii. Wffi,. fffif,iiW!,#litl.tf!.f#il!t.if,f:tif fiiiltttltt.:f:f.i,:#tt:i;.lftflit ltil:h:ttlt.ftftti. t ttt !:l
:ttttl
W,iIW:W,HMi?A
.,.,tr,W
WWW
=WiM4wt/N //7/. nw ä./ i.. it /4 //t /i ;: t/ iN i!:/ il !t |i: !/ :, :t :i :z ::!:i_:_:.
,iffi y////ffi IW//W{ffi
:iZ/.M' W/Mwr.t//r////ij/j/2:-t!-t:-t-t-ti::-t-:-: :-:-:-:i -: -
^
IL'
,,,.,:,:,,",:, ,. ,
WW.ffi;ftfii,{&,it,il1,... fr"n////r//,//// iätttttttt'".",.''i'
T W''; ftf: ir FruW, ft fi: i.W .,,,W tit,t; tWi wi;t 1it iHl;:W|f äfi f fi/ i;:/! .{ ./f ./ ..t// // t/fi/ l/ tf/ 11 /i/ // /// /. ,.//f // /./ // // .// // //A.; r/ /l /i .: it :t :l
,w.i,
lt@Wn"Wn
W:'tiffi,ffii':iW'ffi::lll'ffi
WWWit:trt:i.t,t f,t,t,f:tiiWi. W:,,;.&.|..'ffNiit.1'':i..!:,!1 ..Wij..!'''.' .(!(,n'::M:fil
i!:;tttitttttiLrffiNw....L.!41:W:::i11.:::1|:fu ::|:.#.Wi
'Wi@,,f:fj '"',ffi
':ittljitt!.:1.ffi::iffi,)ltltii:i::iir,tii..,,:tt. j,:ti:!11. &|;;1(.4::;:V:'::f:f::ii/,t//t/,i
'ffi,ri;wi!i1ffi',',',',',tTl,irffi.ffi,ffi,1,'W
i.:;ffi l,,Wl,;ffi lüai?:ffii; l:rj)ffi itiläi.flffi
ilillgffi ir11ffij,,,,:ffi1|,11üaffiii,(ffi ,,t
t;:t-:-t-:w/,j::-://.xri)-:-:-::-:i-:!+r&!!:.!|:i||ai{/t!|tw/Mrt//M
|i:!li//tt!f,/ilr!;lt?l1.ffi itltttlLffi ll:,tltltt;äi;Mitliltlti!./ffi////.ffi/.4
WnnliW/,f/j)i::tMt':'ttttttttiiffiitttttliii!W///,///1ffi/,//,.1/lilttttt
't/////ffi ,,itttttii#;;?)äit|tt:.iM////..////,/.tttttt.,,i
,fllffiffi W'i:i{,ff;i, :',t:ilffii: i,,,,iiii;W"/{/"{/,!//1/////',1i1:,tli::|ltt
4!!tr/!ttu r/!/t /t :!+::::::::aaa
il1,W..,/,,.1i
iii{1:iiii ;,,, '1 ii :1 :::, |1 :||i :f .r :)a
:::;
:i!1,itii!::!!;i.ä:iitttiiitiittt:t': IlO
l]1:Z!
Longitricha puytoraci (fiom FOISSNER & PFISTER 1997, micrographs of Chatton-LwofT silver nitrate-impregnated speci-
mens from type population). 6: Ventrolateral view showing that specimens are usually slightly broader than long. Arrow
marks posterior end of ciliary rows. 7-11: Anterior polar views. Figures 9 and 10 show same specimen in two focal planes.
Asterisk in (9) marks oral opening, arrowhead in (10) denotes ring of pores (cp. Fig. 4). Note that each ciliary row com-
mences with a granule pair. 12: Transverse view in mid-body showing kinety number and two large food vacuoles. 13: Pos-
terior polar view. Although there are some granules in and near the silverlines, caudal cilia complexes, as found in --> Urotri-
cha, are lacking. Arrows denote posterior end of ciliaiy rows. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), p6 = paired (double) gran-
ules at anterior end of ciliary rows, FV = food vacuoles, IDG = inner ring of double granules, OB = oral basket, UM = undu-
lating membrane.
310

Prostomatida
Genus Bursellopsis conuss, 1960
Bursellopsis CORLISS is the replacement name for Bursella SCHMIDT, 1920, a junior homonym of Bursella
TURPIN, a rotifer (CORLISS 1960). The type species, -+ Bursellopsis spumosa, is a huge ciliate, which has, ac-
cording to the detailed original description (SCHMIDT 1920, 1921), a very large, deep, ciliated buccal cavity
(Fig. 2). All other species and populations later assigned to Bursellopsis also have a large oral apparatus, but lack
the deep buccal cavity, indicating that they might belong to a different (new) genus. Unfortunately, a detailed,
modern description of -+ Bursellopsis spumosa is not available. The other Bursellopsis species ale very similar
in all characters. Indeed, they can be separated only by some morphometric features (especially the number of
ciliary rows and oral dikinetids; see Table below) and the shape of the extrusomes. Thus, reliable identification
of these species requires silver slides, where the number of ciliary rows and oral dikinetids must be counted (see
Key below). Admittedly, such a morphometric separation is not very convincing. On the other hand, -+ Bursel-
lopsis truncata remained rather stable for years in the cultures of HILLER (1991), indicating that it is different
from, at least, -+ Bursellopsis pelagica and -+ B. spumosa.
-s Bursellopsis spumosa, -s B. nigricans nigricans, and -+ B. truncata lack caudal cilia, according to the origi-
nal descriptions and the redescriptions by DRAGESCO et al. (1914) and WILBERT (1986a). However, our ob-
servations on -) B. pelagica and -» B. nigricans mobilis, as well as the original description of B. spaniopogon
HILLER, a junior synonym of -+ ß. truncata, show that Bursellopsis has inconspicuous caudal cilia, which were
very likely overlooked previously.
Table: Important morphometrics from B ursellopsis species.
Species (References) I Body, length Numbe12 Extrusomes
in vivo (pm) ciliary rows oral dikinetids micronuclei
thorn-shaped,
B. spumosa (1) 400-800 ? ? 3-12 l0 um long
B. pelagica (3) 130-250 t59 130-198 l2l; 91 *160 0 r 5od x- 0sh .5ap ue md,
B. nigricans mobilis (3) 1 00-200 L16;95-140 I 5; 60-98 ) P)?J.)_? 5-fu l s uif mor m lon, g
fusiform,
B. nigricans nigricans (2, 4-6) 80-180 90; B5-104 ?; 46-60
1 3-4 pm long
fusiform,
B. truncata (1 B) 50-r 10 60; 52-69 42;32-50 2; 1-11
, 2.0-2.5 Um long
References: I = SCHMIDT (1921),2 = DRAGESCO et al. (1974),3 = rhis book, 4 = FAURE-FREMIET (1924), 5 = WILBERT ( 1986a),
6 = LAUTERBORN ( I 908), 7 = KAHL (1921 a, t930), 8 = HILLER ( 1991).
Arithmetic mean; Min-Max.
Key to species
Live 400-800 x 300-600 pm, usually about 400*600 pm long; symbiotic green algae present
B. spumosa (p. 312)
Live<25Opmlong; symbioticgreenalgaelacking ........ 2
2 Live 13V250 x 130-230 pm, usually about 180 x 160 pm; extrusomes rod-shaped, 5 pm long; micronu-
cleus lacking; 130-198 (mean 158) ciliary rows; 97-160 (mean 121) oral dikinetids . . B. pelagica (p. 375)
Live 50-200 pm, usually <150 pm long; extrusomes fusiform, 2--7 pm long; 1 or more micronuclei; <140
ciliary rows; <98 (means 42J5) oral dikinetids . . . . . . . . . . 3
Live 5G-110 trrm long, usually about 60*80 x 50-60 pm; extrusomes 2.0-2.5 pm long; 52-69 ciliary rows;
32-50 oral dikinetids . . . . . B. truncata (p. 391)
311

Prostomatida
- Live 80-200 1rm long, usually >90 pm long; extrusomes 3-7 pm long; >85 ciliary rows; >46 oral dikinetids
;;i;;, ;;,;,,;;
L*" u!-iro'r-, u,uaiy ,d-i00,,- ,",r, i-o u,. ,@^:r!iäJ!r?;l;ii1äi
",r,
dikinetids
(mean 90) ciliary rows; 46-60 oral . B . nigricans nigricans (p. 383)
Live 100-200x90-180pm, usually 140x 110pm; extrusomes 5-7 trrm lorg;2-3 micronuclei; 95-140
dikinetids .
(mean 116) ciliary rows; 60-98 (mean 75) oral . . . B. nigricans mobilis (p. 387)
B urs e llop sis spumosa (scHMrDT, rgz0) coRLISS, 1960
1920 Bursella spumosa SCHMIDT, Sber. naturh. Ver. preuss. Rheinl. Westf., years 1917-1919: 12 (detailed de-
scription without illustration).
l92l Bursella spumosa - SCHMIDT, Arch. mikrosk. Anat. EntwMech., 95: 6 (again described as new species;
with illustrations).
l93O Bursella spumosa W. J. SCHMIDT,1920 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 55 (revision).
1933 Bursella spumosa W. J. SCHMIDT - GAJEWSKAJA, Zoologica, Stuttg., 32: 99 (illustrated record).
196O Bursellopsis spumosa (SCHMIDT,1921) - CORLISS, J. Protozool., 7:274 (combining author).
1914 Bursellopsis spumosa SCHMIDT,1920 - DRAGESCO,IFTODE & FRYD-VERSAVEL, Protistologica,
10: 65 (redescription from life and after silver impregnation; but see taxonomy).
1994 Bursellopsis spumosa (SCHMIDT, I92O) CORLISS, 1960 - FOISSNER, BLATTERER, BERGER &
KOHMANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, U94: 405 ("Ciliate-
Atlas", i.e. taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
The morphology of this large and fragile ciliate is not yet known in detail (see genus introduction); thus, rede-
scription, especially of silver-impregnated specimens is necessary. The redescription by DRAGESCO et al.
(1914) possibly refers to another species because they did not mention the symbiotic green algae and the deep
buccal cavity described by SCHMIDT (1920, l92l); Thus, we excluded their data from the differential
diagnosis, but reproduced the figures for comparison (Fig. 5,6). Bursellopsis spumosd sensu LOKOT (1987) and
sensu MAMAEVA (1979) are only 140-256 pm long, indicating that they belong to a different species (Bursel-
lopsis pelagica?). Holophrya pharyngeataKAHL,1935, although only 250 pm long, is likely a junior synonym,
as indicated by the strongly vacuolized cytoplasm and the symbiotic green algae (Fig. ).
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 400-800 x 300-600 pm, usually 400-600 pm long; postdivider specimens only 250 pm
long.
2) Body broadly ellipsoidal to bursiform, anterior region occupied by large oral opening and obliquely
truncated, due to lobe-like elongation of ventral side; circular in transverse view (Fig. 1,2,7-12). Shape very
fragile, soon becoming irregular during microscopic observation.
3) Macronucleus usually in posterior half of cell, globular to ellipsoidal (Fig. 3). 3-12 micronuclei.
1) Contractile vacuole lacking according to SCHMIDT, but possibly only difficult to recognize due to the
strongly vacuolized cytoplasm.
s) Extrusomes thorn-shaped and slightly curved, about 10 pm long, scattered along ciliary rows and mainly in
posterior body portion (Fig. 13). Cytoplasm conspicuously foamy due to many about 40 pm-sized,
polyhedron-shaped vacuoles separated by thin cytoplasmic areas containing groups of 4-6 pm sized symbi-
otic green algae; oral area free ofzoochlorellae (Fig. l-3,1).
372

Prostomatida
6) Very many (about 200 according to DRAGESCO et al., see taxonomy) ciliary rows, which commence at oral
opening and extend to posterior end (Fig. 1, 5).
t) Oral opening at deeply depressed anterior end of cell, that is, at bottom of huge, ciliated buccal cavity (usu-
ally about 5O Vo of body length). Buccal cavity circular to slit-like in transverse view, fragile (Fig. l*3,1-12;
details of oral ciliature not known).
8) Slowly rotating about main body axis while floating up and down with anterior end and widely opened mouth
directed upwards.
Similar species
Easy to identify due to the huge size (400-800 pm!), the symbiotic green algae, and the foamy cytoplasm. Other
-+ Bursellopsis species and -+ Bursaridium pseudobursaria are distinctly smaller (<300 pm) and lack symbiotic
green algae. l, 2, 5 (symbiotic green algae, foamy cytoplasm) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic in lakes, ponds, and large rivers, especially during the cold seasons.
Locus classicus is Bonn, Germany, where SCHMIDT (1920, 1921) discoveredBursellopsis spumosa in aeutro-
phic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher). During March and April, it preferred sunny sites of the pond
Records mostly not substantiated by illustrations: pelagial of oligo- to mesotrophic groundwater ponds in Austria
during winter, spring, and autumn, with a peak of 184ind.l1 (580mgm3) in early May (KRAINER 1988);
eutrophic ox-bow of the Danube River in Vienna, Austria, in early May (MAYER et al. 1997); with low abun-
dance in the Hamburg Harbour, Germany, during May and June (BARTSCH & HARTWIG 1984); Goczalkowi-
ce reservoir in Poland (KRZYZANEK & KRZYZANEK 1986); reservoirs and ponds in the Ukraine (NEBRAT
1980, OLEKSIV 1985); Lake Onega and reservoirs in Russia (KUSTOVLYANKINA 1990, MYLNIKOVA
1992a, ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992); cooling basin of a power station in Russia (TIMOFEEVA 1989); in Lake
Baikal with a winter and spring peak (KAPLIN 1969), according to GAJEWSKAJA (1933; Fig.7), however,
only in shallow, warm, eutrophic bays (see next chapter).
LIEPA (1978) fotrd Bursellopsis spumosa in Latvian rivers, and NEBRAT (1992) recorded it from the plankton
of the Pripyat River near Chernobyl, Ukraine.
Autecologicat data: Feeds on algae (diatoms, Synura, Planktosphaeria gelatinosa), ciliates (Cyclotrichium),
nauplii (BICK 1912a, DRAGESCO et al. 1914, KRAINER 1988, SCHMIDT 1921) and, according to the origi-
nal description, mainly on rotifers like Filinia, Polyarthra and Keratella. Interestingly, GAJEWSKAJA (1933),
who studied many specimens from plankton-rich sites, never found plankton organisms ingested, except once,
when -+ Cyclotrichium viride was very abundant. Biomass of 106 specimens according to KRAINER (1988)
3150mg, according to FOISSNER et al. (1994) about 18000mg when 400;rm long. GAJEWSKAJA (1933)
fowd Bursellopsis spumosa in Lake Baikal at 8-19"C, pH7.3-:7.7,7.1-13.1mgl-r Oz, 04.4mgl-r COzr."",
20-38 mg l'1 CaO, 1.8-6.2 mg l'1 MgO, 1.2-5.1mg l-' SiOz.
Ecological summary: Recorded from Europe and Asia only. Euplanktonic in lakes, ponds, and large rivers.
Probably prefers the cold seasons, that is, avoids temperatures >20'C. Oligo-stenohaline. Mixotrophic, that is,
feeds on plankton organisms (algae, ciliates, rotifers) and contains symbiotic algae, which might help to sustain
periods oflow food supply. Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et al. (1994): oligosaprobic (o = 7, b
=3,I= 4, SI = 1.3).
313

Prostom atida
BC
l
VA
AO
VA<
GG)
eU[-r,o
Bursellopsis spumosa ( l-3, tt- l-3, tionr SCHMIDT l92l ; 4, fiom KAHL 1935, 5, 6, DRAGESCO et al. 1974 population tiom the March
plankton of a forest pond in France, see taxonomy; 7, from GAJEWSKAJA 1933. l, 2, 4, 7-12, in vivo; 3, mercuric chloride-fixed
specimen; 5, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation; 6, composite from live and Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate-impregnated specimens; 13,
haematoxilin stain). 1., 7l Ventral views, 490 pm, ?trrm. Note the huge buccal cavity and the foamy cytoplasm; the bridges between the vacu-
oles are filled with symbiotic green algae. 2,6: Lateral views (490 pm, 325 pm) showing lobe-like ventral elongation. 3: Ventral view show-
ing macronucleus and reticulate arrangement of symbiotic green algae. 4'. Holophrya pharyngeata, a supposed synonym of B. spumosa,
250 pm. 5: Oblique anterior polar view showing oral and somatic ciliary pattem. 8: Long specimen with narrowed buccal cavity (arrow).
9-12: Anterior polar views showing shapes of oral opening. Lobelike elongation on upper side of figures. 13: Cross section of cell margin
showing thorn-shaped extrusomes. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), BC = buccal cavity with somatic ciliary rows, CR - ciliary rows, E =
extrusomes, Ma = macronucleus, OA = oral apparatus, SS = silverline system, UM = undulating membrane (circumoral ciliary row), VA =
cytoplasmic vacuoles up to 40 pm across.
374

Prostomatida
Bursellopsis pelagica nov. spec.
Diagnosis:Sizeinvivoaboutl80x160pm; broadlybursiform.Verylikelyamicronucleate.Extrusomes
rod-shaped, about 5 pm long. 159 ciliary rows,80 caudal cilia, and 121 circumoral dikinetids on average.
Type I o c ati on: HöglwörtherSee, a smalllake in southemBavaria, Germany (41"49'N,12"50'E).
Type lide
s s: Fourslides (1 holotype,3 paratypes) withprotargol-impregnated specimens havebeendepos-
ited in the Oberösterreichische Landesmuseum in Linz (LI), Austria.
E t y m o I o g y: peldgicus (lat.), living in the sea.
D i f f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (detailed morphometric data, see Table on next page)
1) Size in vivo 130-250 x 13V230 pm, usually about 180 x 160 pm.
2) Body bursiform with + distinctly depressed oral area, circular in transverse view: specimens thus look like ro-
tating globules in the dissecting microscope (Fig. 1, 8, 16,22,23). Shape very fragile, soon becoming irregu-
lar during microscopic observation (Fig. 8, 9, 18, 19).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, but slightly eccentric, that is, usually underneath brosse; globular to slightly el-
lipsoidal, about 50 x 40 pm in protargol-impregnated specimens (Fig. 1, 2,20, 24,27). Micronucleus very
likely lacking because not found in properly orientated and impregnated specimens.
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior pole area (Fig. 1), with single, large excretory pore at border of somatic cilia-
ture and caudal cilia area.
5) Extrusomes rod-shaped with narrowed ends, in vivo about 5 x 0.5 pm, very numerous and thus forming dis-
tinct peripheral fringe providing cells with a greyish colour at low magnification (<100x); found in rows right
of somatic ciliary rows, in caudal cilia area, and within oral basket, where they produce a compact, bright
zone, Ieaving blank only the central area (Fig. 1,4,5,IJ,18,22,25,26). Cytoplasm with rather many bright
vacuoles (Fig. 1). No symbiotic green algae. Cortex hexagonally pattemed (Fig. 6, 21).
6) 130-198 (mean 159) meridional ciliary rows, which commence at oral opening and extend to posterior end,
leaving blank a small area occupied by 60-100 loosely spaced, about 20 pm long caudal cilia, which are dif-
ficult to recognize in living cells; about 15 ciliary rows abut at acute angles to the adoral organelles (Fig.3,7,
14, 15,23-26,29,35). At posterior end of adoral organelles some specialized ciliary rows, as described by
HILLER (1991) in --> Bursellopsis truncata, which, however, are recognizable only in silver nitrate-
impregnated specimens.
7) Oral opening occupies about 1/3 of anterior body önd. circular. fragile, that is, soon becomes slit-like and un-
dulating in distorted specimens (Fig.3, 18, 19,22-24,31); appears + distinctly depressed in undisturbed
specimens, whose pharyngeal plasm is frequently excavated bowl-like (Fig. 8), but becomes flat or convex in
prepared specimens (Fig. 22, 23). Oral basket inconspicuous in vivo, filled with cytoplasm and extrusomes,
consists of rather thick rods converging to body centre (Fig. 1-3, 8, 10-12,27). Unddating membrane (cir-
cumoral ciliary row) circular, composed of 97-160 (mean 121) dikinetids each associated with a very short
ciliary stump and a long oral basket rod (Fig. 3,7,11, 12,27-32). Brosse (= adoral organelles) distinctly
enklitoloph-dexiotrop (terminology, see FOISSNER et al. 1994, p.317), composed of 3 rows extending about
25 Vo of body length; each row consists of oblique dikinetids having a short cilium associated with the ante-
rior basal body only (Fig. 3, 1,15,29-36).
8) Movement inconspicuous, swims slowly by counter-clockwise (seen from posterior towards anterior cell
pole) rotation about main body axis.
Similar species
Easily confused with --s Bursellopsis nigricans mobilis (extrusomes rod-shaped vs. fusiform, 130-198 vs.
95-140 ciliary rows, 91-160 vs. 60-98 oral dikinetids, amicronucleate (?) vs. 2 micronuclei). -+ Bursellopsis
spumosa has symbiotic green algae and is 2-4 times larger than B. pelagica. -+ Bursellopsis truncata and -+ B.
315

Prostomatida
nigricans nigricans are smaller (<14-0 pm) and thus have much fewer ciliary rows and oral dikinetids (see Table
by genus introduction). 1, 5 , 6, J (number of oral dikinetids) arekey characters for identification).
Table: Morphometric data from Bursellopsis pelagica.
Characterr Mean M SD SE CV Min Max n
Body, length 163.2 160 24.1 5.1 15.2 110 2C0 T9
Body, maximum width 158.0 150 29.6 6.8 18.1 120 230 t9
Circumoral ciliary row to proximal end
41.6 10 8.5 2.0 19.0 35 60 t9
of brosse, distance
Oral opening (circumoral ciliary row), 54.6 55 10.8 2.5 19.8 36 l0 t9
maximum diameter
Macronucleus, length 50.6 50 7.3 r.1 14.3 35 6l t9
Macronucleus, width 39.8 40 9.0 2.1 22.1 2t 65 t9
Macronuclei, number 1.0 1 0.0 0.0 0.0 I 1 T9
Somatic ciliary rows, number 158.7 160 t7 .7 4.1 tt.2 130 198 19
Brosse rows, number 3.0 J4., 0.0 0.0 0.0 J1 J') t9
.
Circumoral dikinetids, number rzt.4 r20 t4.5 J.. ., J tt.9 9l 160 t9
I
Field specimens after protargol impregnation. Measurements in pm. CV = coefficient of variation in Vo, M = median, Max = rnaximum,
Mean = arithmetic mean, Min = minimum, n = number of specimens investigated, SD = standard deviation, SE = standard error of mean.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: As yet found only at type location, a small, eutrophic lake in Bavaria, Germany,
where it occurred in considerable numbers (about 100-500 ind. lr) during the spring (April) and early summer
lJune) ciliate bloom.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds mainly on various species of rotifers, but also on ciliates
(Astylozoon), algae (large colonies of Pandorina, Cyclotella), and flagellates (Peranema). Euplanktonic. Bio-
mass of 106 medium-sized specimens about 2000 mg. Very likely greatly influences numbers and community
structure of rotifers, its preferred prey.
376

Prostomatida
I
I
I
I
4
UM
AO
';-
A0
7
Bursellopsis petagica (1, z[-6, in vivo; 2, 3, 7, protargol impregnation) 1: Lateral view of a representative specimen (length 160 pm) with
three large food vacuoles. Note peripheral extrusome fringe.2,3: Frontal view showing ciliary pattem, nuclear apparatus, and large food in-
clusions (rotifers), 145 pm. 4: Extrusome, 5 x 0.5 trrm. 5, 6: Arrangement of extrusomes and cortical pattem.7i The oral ciliature is com-
posed of three adoral organelles and 97-160 circumoral dikinetids, whose shortened cilia form a very inconspicuous undulating membrane.
Distance from undulating membrane to posterior end of brosse about 50 pm. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CA = caudal cilia, E = extru-
somes, FV = food vacuoles, MA = macronucleus, OO = oral opening, UM = undulating membrane (circumoral ciliary row).
371

Prostom atrda
Fj
_\\\ )
>OO Oa OO Oa ) )
dri
10
11
\,BB
1J\
13
a,t.
aa
a a
-...:.o. aa a' a aa a a
a a
a
a a aOa1
aa
a a a a
a a aa aa aa aa a aa a aa a a a a a
a o aa
a
a
aa a
a aa a a
aa a a
14 15 a a
a.
Bursellopsis pelagica (8-10, in vivo; I l-15, protargol impregnation). 8: Specimen with excavated oral opening, that is, depressed pharyn-
geal plasm. 9: Same specimen as shown in Figure 8, but some minutes later, when it was dying. The shape became irregular and the oral
opening slit-like (cp. Fig. 18, 19). 10: Oral basket rod in vivo. 11: Anterior portion of oral basket rod after protargol impregnation. l2l Cir-
cumoral ciliature and oral basket. A dense fibre extends on the inner anterior margin of the oral opening. The oral dikinetids (arrowhead) are
associated with a short fibre and a rather thick rod (nematodesma), which extends to the cell centre forming the oral basket. 13: Caudal ki-
netid with three kinds of fibrillar associates, forming starlike pattem (Fig. 25). 14: Posterior polar view of ciliary pattem, 155 pm. The cen-
tre of the pole is occupied by about 80 scattered caudal cilia (Fig. 26). 15: Posterior portion of brosse (adoral organelles). The ciliary rows
abutting to the right and posterior end of the brosse appear unspecialized after protargol impregnation. However, silver nitrate-prepared
specimens show a modified silverline system, as described by HILLER (1991) in -+ Bursellopsis truncata. AO = adoral organelles (brosse),
BB = basal body of a caudal cilium, CR = ciliary rows, F = fibres.
378

Prostom alida
:": !t*.. .,: ": '*::
16
Bursellopsis pelagica (16-19, in vivo; 20, protargol impregnation; 21,22, preserved specimens; 23, scanning electron micrograph). 16:
Freely motile, representative specimen with three dark food (rotifers) inclusions. Arrows border oral opening. 17: Extrusomes (anows),
5 x 0.5 pm. 18, 19: Lateral and frontal view ofa distorted specimen. The oral opening (arrows) is widened slirtike. 20,22r23 Oblique fron-
tal views. Note the metachronal ciliary waves (23) and the large oral opening filled with extrusomes (arrowhead in22).21: Surface view
showing hexagonally pattemed cortex and extrusomes as bright dots right of ciliary rows. CR = ciliary rows, E = exffusomes, FV = food
vacuoles, MA = macronucleus, OO = oral opening.
319

Prostomatida
AO
24
ilt
I
j§
ri{t
+ /
"f 'Ü
t § $di"i- E
gs. t§ r Jr"
k$ t
26
Bursellopsis pelagica (24, protargol impregnation; 25,26, silver carbonate irnpregnation). 24: Obtique anterior polar view
showing general organization of ciliary pattern. The oral opening is very distinct because it is surrounded by dikinetids (ba-
sal body pairs) and a heavily impregnated fibre (Fig. 12). Typically, Bursellopsis pelagica contains some large food vacu-
oles with rotifers. 25r26:Posterior polar views. The posterior pole areaof Bursellopsis pelagica is occupied by 60-100 scat-
tered, slightly elongated caudal cilia (large arrows in 25), which are difficult to recognize in live specimens. The basal bodies
of the caudal cilia are associated with three short fibres (small arrows in 25) producing a star-like pattem (Fig. 13). AO =
adoral organelles (brosse), BB = basal body, CR = ciliary rows, E = extrusome, FV = food vacuole, MA = macronucleus,
UM = undulating membrane (circumoral ciliary row).
380

Prostomatida
uM
, ,\,
#|i,:,ffi::i/n
*, ., . ,. ... . t,.. i:. . t. t .; , ; :; &i : ", ,. .. ; ': ' ,i: : i: l "it .t r|i ,
,.,?,;..:" g1r,,.,.ri.l,
Bursellopsis pelagica(27,29-32,protargol impregnation; 28, scanning electron micrograph). 27-32zThe oral ciliature consists ofa circu-
moral ciliary row (undulating membrane) and three adoral organelles (brosse), which extend about 25 7o ofbody length (cp. Fig. 33, 35).
Both the circumoral ciliary row and the adoral organelles are composed ofpaired basal bodies (dikinetids) having shortened cilia; those of
the circumoral ciliary row are reduced to minute stumps (arrows in Fig. 28). AO = adoral organelles (brosse), C = cilia, E = extrusomes, F
= fibre, MA = macronucleus, N = nematodesmata (oral basket rods), OO = oral opening, UM = undulating membrane (circumoral ciliary
row).
381

Prostom atida
Bursellopsis pelagica (33,34,36, scanning electron rnicrographs; 35, protargol irnpregnation).33-35: Burscllopsis pclugiL.u
is a conspicuous ciliate with a large oral opening and three adoral organelles (brosse; arrows), which are composed of
oblique, paired basal bodies. The brosse extends from the oral opening backwards for about 25 7o ofbody length. 36: Poste-
rior end of brosse (arrows). The adoral organelles extend between minute ridges and have shortened cilia. AO = adoral or-
ganelles (brosse), OO = oral opening.
382

Prostomatida
Bursellopsis nigricans (LAUTERBoRN, 18e4) nov. comb.
1894 Holophrya nigricans LAUTERBORN, Biol. Zbl.,14:396 (detailed description without illustration).
1908 Holophrya nigricans LAUTERB. - LAUTERBORN, Z. wiss. Zool., 90: 651 (with illustration).
1924 Holophry(t gargamel/a FAURE-FREMIET, Bull. biol. Fr. Betg., Suppl. 6: 36 (new synonym).
l93O Holophrya nigricans LAUTERBORN, 1908 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 52 (revision; incorrect dating).
1930 Bursella (Holophrya) gargamellae FAURE-FR., 1922 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 55 (revision; incorrect
dating).
1933 Holophrya mobilis V/ANG & NIE, Contr. biol. Lab. Sci. Soc. China, 10: 18 (here ranked as subspecies B.
nigricans mobilis).
l9l4 Bursellopsis gargamellaeFAIJRE-FREMIET, 1924 - DRAGESCO,IFTODE & FRYD-VERSAVEL, 10:
64 (redescription after silver impregnation).
1986 Bursellopsis gargamellae FAURE-FREMIET, 1924 - WILBERT, Arch. Protistenk., 131: 61 (redescrip-
tion from life and after silver impregnation).
I mp ro v e d d i ag n o s i s: Size invivo 80-200 x 65-180 pm; broadly ovoidal to bursiform. 1-2 micronu-
clei. Extrusomes fusiform. 85-140 ciliary rows and 46-98 circumoral dikinetids.
Taxonomy
Synonymy of Holophrya nigricans LAUTERBORN and H. gargamellae FAURE-FREMIET is indicated by
many morphological and ecological features, for example, size, large oral apparatus, conspicuous fringe of extru-
somes, pelagic habitat, and preferred occuffence in winter. LAUTERBORN (1894, 1908) studied the cortex in
detail and found that each meridional alveoli row is ciliated (Fig. 2). Conversely, the type species of Holophrya,
H. ovum EHRENBERG, has a row of alveoli without cilia between each two ciliary rows (see FOISSNER et al.
1994, p. 326,Fig.21 andFig. 2by -+ Pelagothrix chlorelligera). Thus, we transfer H. nigricans to Bursellopsis,
which has each row of cortical alveoli ciliated (Fig. 6 by -+ Bursellopsis pelagica).
We split this species into two subspecies differing mainly in body shape and morphometric features. The im-
proved diagnosis is based on the original description, the redescriptions by DRAGESCO et al. (1914) and WIL-
BERT (1986a), and our data from B. nigricans mobilis. Bursellopsis nigricans nigricans lacks caudal cilia, ac-
cording to the original description and the redescriptions by DRAGESCO et al. (1974) and WILBERT (1986a).
However, we consider the occurrence of caudal cilia as a genus character, and thus suggest that they have been
overlooked by the authors mentioned above; possibly, they are less conspicuous than in Bursellopsis nigricans
)
mobilis, B. truncata, and --> B. pelagica.
The specimens observed by VUXANOYICI (1962a) are very small (40-45 pm), indicating misidentification.
According to KAHL (1930), Prorodon morula GAJEVSKAJA, 1928 from Lake Baikal is a junior synonym of
Bursellopsis nigricans; however, this species lacks extrusomes, indicating that it is different from B. nigricans.
B urs ellop sis nigricans subspe cies nigrirazs (LAUTERBoRN, r 8e4) nov. stat.
Improved diagno s i s: Size invivo about30-180x65-150pm; broadlyobovoidal. l micronucleus.
Extrusomes about 3-4 pm long. 85-104 (mean 90) ciliary rows and 46-60 circumoral dikinetids.
Taxonomy
The improved diagnosis is based on the descriptions by LAUTERBORN (1894, 1908), FAURE-FREMIET
(1924), DRAGESCO etal. (1974), and WILBERT (1986a).
383

Prostom atida
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 80*180 x 65-150 pm, usually about 90-140 pm long.
2) Body obovoidal with + distinctly depressed oral area, circular in transverse view; specimens thus look like ro-
tating globules at low magnification (Fig. 1-4). Shape very fragile, soon becoming irregular during micro-
scopic observation.
3) Macronucleus globular to ellipsoidal, near mid-body (Fig. 1,3,4). Usually 1 micronucleus.
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior pole area, eccentric, with single excretory pore (Fig. 1,4,5).
5) Extrusomes fusiform,3-4pm long, numerous and thus forming distinct peripheral fringe (Fig. 1,3). Cyto-
plasm with many vacuoles (Fig. 1, 3). No symbiotic green algae. Cortex hexagonally pattemed (Fig. 2, 5).
6) 85-104 (mean 90) meridional ciliary rows, which commence at circumoral ciliary row (undulating mem-
brane) and extend to posterior end. Inconspicuous caudal cilia very likely present (+ taxonomy). 6-10 ciliary
rows abut at acute angles to adoral organelles (Fig. 4, 5).2-3 condensed somatic ciliary rows right of poste-
rior end of adoral organelles (Fig. a, 5).
7) Oral opening occupies about 1/3 of anterior body end, circular, and fragile; appears + distinctly depressed in
undisturbed specimens (Fig. 1-6). Oral basket inconspicuous in vivo. Undulating membrane (circumoral cili-
ary row) circular, composed of about 46-60 dikinetids each associated with a long rod to form the oral
basket. Brosse (adoral organelles) enklitoloph-dexiotrop (terminology, see FOISSNER et al. 1994, p. 317),
composed of 3 rows extending U4 to U3 of body length; each row consists of oblique dikinetids with, possi-
bly, a short cilium associated with the anterior basal body only (Fig. 4-6).
8) Movement not known, likely inconspicuous as in congeners ( -+ ß. pelagica).
Similar species
-+ Bursellopsis nigricans nigricans differs from B. nigricans mobilis by the body shape (obovoidal vs. bursiform
to ellipsoidal), the number of micronuclei (1 vs. 2), the number of ciliary rows (90 vs. 116), the number of circu-
moral dikinetids (46-60 vs. 75) and, possibly, by the.more indistinct caudal cilia (see discussion of species
above!). -+ Bursellopsis truncqto is slightly smaller (50-110 pm), bursiform; and has fewer ciliary rows (52-69).
-s Bursellopsis pelagica is larger (130-250 pm) and thus has many more ciliary rows (130-198; mean 159). -+
Bursellopsis spumosa is about 500 pm long and has sym-biotic green ilgae. -+ Pelagothrix species are smaller
(40-60 pm) and have zoochlorellae. 1, 2 (extrusomes fusiform, 3-4 pm long), 5, 6,7 are key characters for iden-
tification.
Ecology
For the sake of simplicity, all ecological data known from Bursellopsis nigricans are assigned to Bursellopsis
nigricans nigricans.
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic in ponds, lakes, reservoirs, and large rivers. The locus classicus of
Bursellopsis nigricans nigricans is near the town of Ludwigshafen, Germany, where LAUTERBORN (1894,
1908; Fig. l, 2) discovered it in the pelagial of ponds and ox-bows from November to March. Locus classicus of
the synonym Holophrya gargamellae is Pr6cy (Vall6e de l'Oise, France), where FAURE-FRBUIET O924;Fig.
3) discovered it in a clear pond. DRAGESCO et al. (1974, Fig. 5, 6) found Holophrya gargamellae under ice in
small stagnant water bodies near Paris, France.
Further records from Bursellopsis nigricans: with low abundance in an oligotrophic lake (Erdfallsee) in Ger-
many (EHLERS 1965); ox-bow of Danube river in Hungary (NOSEK & BERECZKY 1981); pelagic in a large
rain puddle in Szeged, Hungary, during December (GELEI & SZABADOS 1950); reservoir in Azerbaijan
(ALEKPEROV 1984a); dominant in reservoirs of the Moscow River supply system, Russia (BELOVA 1994);
384

Prostomatida
Ukrainian reservoirs (NEBRAT 1980); 6 ind. cm-2 in the water-sediment interface of Lake Kinneret, Israel (MA-
DONI 1990). GAJEWSKAJA (1933, with illustration) found B. nigricans in the clean water of the Bultuk Bay,
Lake Baikal, at 1 1o C in late July, feeding on dead gammarids; however, the contractile vacuole is exactly termi-
nal, indicating that is a Holophrya.
Further records of Bursellopsis gargamellae: Denmark (WESENBERG-LUND 1952); about 1000 ind. l-r in a
eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Bonn, Germany, only during spring and autumn, when its main food,
Synura uvella, was present (WILBERT 1969, 1986a, Fig. 4); eu- to polytrophic Eifel maar lake (Meerfelder
Maar) in Germany (PACKROFF I992,PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991); up to 385 ind. l1 in about 1 m depth of
a eutrophic lake (Plußsee) near Plön, Germany, during March and early April (RECK 1981;' -+ Table).
Records from the potamoplankton: up to 7 ind. 1-r in the Danube River in Hungary (BERECZKY 1971 , l9lla);
1 ind. l-r in River Vistula during winter (KLIMOWICZ 1981); Pripyat River, Ukraine (NEBRAT 1992).
Autecological data and eological summary: Feeds on flagellated algae (Volvocinea, Synura uvella) and espe-
cially Peridinium palatinuin (BICK 1912a, FAURE-FREMIET 1924, LAUTERBORN 1908, WILBERT 1986a).
Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens about 350mg. Autecological data -+ Table. Reliably recorded from
France and Germany only. Euplanktonic in ponds and lakes, common only during the cold seasons. As an algae
and flagellate feeder, Bursellopsis nigricans nigricans very likely prefers eutrophic conditions.
Table: Autecological data of Bursellopsis nigricans nigricans. Column l, from REINNARTH (1979; ? analyses from the mud-water inter-
face of a pond in Germany); column 2, from WILBERT (1986a; ? analyses from a eutrophic pond in Germany); columns 3, 4, from RECK
(1987;?analysesfromaeutrophiclakeinGermany;column3=totalrange,column4=>300ind.lr).
Parameters References
1 2 Ja 4
Temperature (" C) 0.9-tr.2 3.9-t4.t 6.8
pH t.t9-t.51 t.t-8.0 8.67-8.91 8.67
o, (mg I') 4.9-7.t 9.0- 14.5 1l.r
Oz (saturation 7o) 68-t40 9t
NH+*-N (mg 1') 0.0-2.0 0.0-0.5 0.034-0.056 0.045
NO: -N (mg l') 2.8-6.3 4.6-t3.2
Coz (mg I') 8.5- 15 .6
Bursellopsis nigricans nigri-
cans in vivo (from LAUTER-
BORN 1908). 1: Lateral view
showing main organelles,
110-lB0x ll0-l50pm. 2:
Anterior polar view showing
large oral opening and hex-
agonally patterned cortex.
Note that each alveoli row is
ciliated (dots). The specimen
has only 71 ciliary rows, pos-
sibly due to some schematiza-
tion and/or the lack of exact
data.
385

Prostomatida
00
AO
MA
t
CR
§§\NI
aI!
Bursellopsis nigricans nigricans (3, from FAURE-FREMIET 1924; 4, from
WILBERT 1986a; 5, 6, from DRAGESCO et al. 1914; J, 8, from KAHL I92Ja,
1930, redrawn from FAURE-FREMIET 1924. 3, J,8, in vivo; 4, composite from
live and protargol-impregnated specimens; 5, 6, protargol impregnation). 3, 7, 8:
Lateral views, 80 pm. 4: Oblique anterior polar view showing main organelles
and oral and somatic ciliary pattern, 150 pm. Note that the extrusomes are longer
(3-4 pm) than illustrated by WILBERT. 5, 6: Right lateral view and anterior po-
lar view of ciliary pattern. Ciliary rows and hexagonal cortical pattern (arrow)
only partially illustrated. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CR = condensed cili-
ary row, CV = contractile Vacuole, E = extrusomes, FV = food vacuoles contain-
tng Synura, MA = macronucleus, OO = oral opening.
386

Prostomatida
Bursellopsis nigricarzs subspecies mobilis (wANG & NrE, 1933) nov. comb. nov. stat.
1933 Holophrya mobilis WANG & NIE, Contr. biol. Lab. Sci. Soc. China, 10: 18.
Our observations largely agree with the rather fragmentary data of WANG & NIE (1933). Thus, we neotypify
the species. Furthermore, we lower the rank because it is rather similar to B. nigricans nigricans.
Improve d di agno s i s: Size invivo about 100-200x90-180pm (mean about 140x 110pm);broadly
bursiform to ellipsoidal. Two micronuclei. Extrusomes 5-7 pm long. 95-l4O (mean 116) ciliary rows, about 50
caudal cilia, ard 60-98 (mean 75) circumoral dikinetids.
Ne oty p e s I i de s: Two neotype slides withprotargol-impregnated specimens havebeendepositedinthe
Oberösterreichische Landesmuseum in Linz (LI), Austria.
D i f f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (Fig. 1-11; detailed morphometric data, see Table below)
Bursellopsis nigricans mobilis differs from -+ B. nigricans nigricans by the body shape (bursiform to ellipsoidal
vs. obovoidal ,Fig.2a,6,7), the number of micronuclei (2 vs. l,Fig.2a), the number of ciliary rows (116 vs. 90),
the number of circumoral dikinetids (75 vs. 4640) and, possibly, by the more distinct caudal cilia (see discus-
sion of species above!).
The in vivo appearance and the ciliary pattem of B. nigricans mobilis are very similar to those of -+ ß. pelagica.
Thus, the figures given for that species apply also for B. nigricans mobilis.In vivo, B. nigricans mobilis can be
distinguished from -+ B. pelagica by the fusiform extrusomes (rod-shaped in -+,8. pelagica).In thä scanning
electron microscope, B. nigricans mobilis differs from -+ B. pelagica by the long (about 4 pm in the scanning
electron microscope) cilia of brosse row 1, which has a conspicuous, serrated appearance (Fig. a).
Table: Morphometric data from B ursellopsis nigricans mobilis.
Characterl Mean M SD SE CV Min Max n
tl
Body, length t25.4 t20 29.9 1.3 23.8 90 180
I]
Body, maximum width 108.7 108 23.9 5.8 22.0 B3 160
Circumoral ciliary row to proximal end of
34.7 30 8.6 2.t 24.8 22 50 t1
brosse, distance
Oral opening, maximum diameter 32.5 '30 1.2 1.8 22.3 2t 50 t7
Macronucleus, length 36.2 J.1 J.) t.l t.9 2t.t 26 50 t1
Macronucleus, width 28.6 25 7.5 1.8 26.3 20 45 t1
Micronuclei, number 2.t 2 0.4 0.1 16.5 2 J.) 15
Somatic ciliary rows, number tt6.4 120 lt.3 2.1 9.1 95 T40 t7
Brosse rows, number 3.0 J,1 Ja J.., t6
Circumoral dikinetids, number t 5.4 74 t0.4 2.5 13.8 60 98 t1
' Field specimens after protargol impregnation. Measurements in pm. CV = coefficient of variation rn Vo,M = median, Max = maximum,
Mean = arithmetic mean, Min = minimum, n = number of specimens investigated, SD = standard deviation, SE = standard enor of mean.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Discovered by WANG & NIE (1933) in a Lotus pond in China during the winter
months 1932-1933. We found it in a small, eutrophic lake (Höglwörther See) in Bavaria, Germany, where it oc-
curred together with -+ Bursellopsis pelagica, that is, mainly during spring and early summer.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Euplanktonic. Psychrophilic, dies off quickly at>20" C. Biomass
of 106 medium-sized specimens about 900 mg (our calculations). Possibly influences, like -+ Bursellopsis pe-
lagica, numbers and community structure of rotifers, its preferred prey (Fig. 6, 7).
387



Prostomatida
oo
I
/
MA
ü
- oB
Bursellopsis nigricans mobilis (5a, original from Höglwörther See population;5b i, fiom WANG & NIE 1933. -5a, protar-
go1 impregnation; 5b-i, in vivo). 5a: Oblique, ventral anterior polar view of somatic and oral ciliary pattern. Arrow marks
posterior end of adoral organelles (brosse), which are composed of paired basal bodies having short cilia (cp. Fig. 3, 4). 5b,
d, h, i: Globular specimens, length about 100pm.5c, e-g: Elongate specimens, length about l20pm. Note distinct extru-
some fringe in specimens shown in Figures 5b, c. F = fibre extending at inner margin of oral opening, MA = macronucleus,
OB = oral basket, OO = oral opening, UM = undulating membrane (circumoral ciliary row).
389



Prostomatida
B ur s e llo p s is trunc ata («rur, 1 927) coRLISS, 1 960
1927 Holophrya truncata KAHL, Arch. Protistenk., 60: 56.
l93O Bursella (Holophrya) truncata KAHL, 1921 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 55 (revision).
1960 Bursellopsis truncata (KAHL 1921) - CORLISS, J. Protozool., 274 (combining author).
1968 Bursellopsis truncata CORLISS, 1960 - CHORIK, Free-living ciliates, p. 46 (illustrated record).
l99l Bursellopsis spaniopogonHILLER, Europ. J. Protistol., 27: I (new synonym).
Taxonomy
HILLER (1991) avoided a thorough comparison of his species (Fig. l-5, 8-11) with Bursellopsis truncata (Fig.
6,7). Size, shape, and extrusomes are very similar in both species. Differences only exist in the number of micro-
nuclei (1 in B. truncata vs. 2-1 I in B. spaniopogon) and caudal cilia (absent rn B. truncata, present in B. spanio-
pogon). However, both characters are difficult to recognize in live (and even stained; see HILLER 1991) speci-
mens, suggesting that KAHL (1927a, 1930) simply overlooked them. Detailed descriptions of further populations
of small Bursellopsis species are necessary to substantiate the synonymy suggested.
Diiterential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 50-110 x 35-95 ;rm, usually about 60-80 x 50-60 pm.
2) Body bursiform with + distinctly depressed oral area, circular in transverse view; specimens thus look like ro-
tating globules at low magnification (Fig. 1, 6). Shape very fragile, soon becoming irregular during micro-
scopic observation (Fig. 3, 7).
3) Macronucleus globular, near mid-body. Usually 2,rarely up to 11 micronuclei (Fig. 1, 5, 6, 8).
4) Contractile vacuole subterminal and eccentric (Fig. 1, 6), with single excretory pore at border of somatic
ciliature and caudal cilia area (Fig. l, 5, 6, 1 1).
5) Extrusomes fusiform, in vivo 2.V2.5 pm long, very numerous and thus forming distinct peripheral fringe
(Fig. I, G-9). Cytoplasm strongly vacuolated. No symbiotic green algae. Cortex hexagonally patterned (Fig.
,l).
6) 52-69 (mean 60) meridional ciliary rows, which commence at circumoral ciliary row (undulating membrane)
and extend to posterior end, leaving blank a small area occupied by 9-16 (mean 12) loosely spaced, about
15 pm long caudal cilia, which are difficult to recognize in live cells (-+ taxonomy); 8-15 ciliary rows abut at
acute angles to the adoral organelles; 3-4 specialized ciliary rows right of posterior end of adoral organelles
(Fig. 1,5,8, 10, 11).
7) Oral opening occupies about 1/3 of anterior body end, circular, more or less distinctly depressed in undis-
turbed specimens, fragile, that is, soon becomes slit-like and undulating in distorted specimens (Fig. 1, 3, 5,
7,9). Oral basket inconspicuous in vivo, filled with plasrn. Undulating membrane (circumoral ciliary row)
circular, composed of 32-50 (meat 42) dikinetids, each associated with a very short ciliary stump and a
long oral basket rod (Fig. 1, 5, 9). Brosse (adoral organelles) distinctly enklitoloph-dexitrop (terminology,
see FOISSNER et al. 1994, p. 317), composed of three rows extending about 3O Vo of body length; each row
consists of oblique dikinetids having a short cilium associated with the anterior basal body only (Fig. 1, 5, 8,
e).
8) Movement inconspicuous, swims slowly by counter-clockwise (seen from posterior towards anterior cell
pole) rotation about main body axis.
39r

Prostomatida
Similar species
All other -+ Bursellopsis species are larger (usually >90 pm) and have more ciliary rows (>80). -+ Bursellopsis
spumosa, the largest species (usually 400-600 pm long), has symbiotic green algae. In vivo difficult to separate
from large -+ Urotricha and Longifragma species (distinct flaps around oral opening, brosse rows very short and
near oral opening in Urotricha, body more compact, often move by distinct jumps). -+ Pelagothrix species have
symbiotic green algae. -+ Longitricha is globular and has a large, unciliated pole area. l, 5 (no symbiotic green
algae), 6, 7 (undulating membrane reduced to ciliary stumps) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: In pond and lake plankton, but also among macrophytes. Locus classicus is a
katharobic pond in a rifle range near Hamburg, Germany, where KAHL (1927a) discovered Bursellopsis trun-
cata among Nitella and Elodea in winter. Locus classicus of the synonym, Bursellopsis spaniopogon, is Tuebin-
gen, Germany, where HILLER (1991) discovered it in the epipelagial of a slightly eutrophic pond in the Botani-
cal Garden. CHORIK (1968) fotnd Bursellopsis truncara in Moldavian water bodies.
Records not documented by illustrations: Ukrainian reservoirs and ponds (KRAVCHENKO 1969, NEBRAT
1980, OLEKSIV 1985, OLEKSIV et al. 1986); water bodies in southem USSR (JAROSHENKO & CHORIK
1969);Latvian rivers (LIEPA 1978); water bodies on Tibetan plateau (SHEN 1983).
HILLER (1991) described a remarkable seasonality: "The appearance of Bursellopsis spaniopogon in the epipe-
lagial of its habitat depends on the season. It appears regularly in spring (February to April) then it disappears
and reappears, though less abundantly, in autumn (October and November). This seasonal cycle can be observed
also under rigidly standardized culture conditions (cultivation at 10"C, 12hLlD change and weekly feeding).
There is a regular decrease of the number of individuals in cultures during the summer months (May to August).
The cells starve in spite of being offered plenty of food, become visibly smaller, and produce substantially more
mucocysts. In autumn the cultures quickly recover to grow best during the winter. As this rhythm is still synchro-
nized with the season, even after a cultivation of four years, an external time indicator must be assumed. Proba-
bly this synchronization is brought about by the food organism which is not cultivated under standard
conditions".
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on algae (Chlorogonium elongatum, coccal green algae;
HILLER 1991, KAHL I927a). Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens about 150 mg (our calculations) and
only about 50 mg when 55 pm long (NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991). Avoids low oxygen levels (JA-
ROSHENKO & CHORIK 1969). Reliably recorded from Germany only. Very likely, Bursellopsis truncata is a
euplanktonic organism preferring the cold seasons and oxygen-rich waters. Did not produce cysts in cultures
(HTLLER 1991).
392

Prostom atida
\\\\!llIl
\\iiiiifI
*i \\\\r !r
r
,il
CV
Bursellopsis truncata ( l-5 , Bursellopsis spaniopogotl fiom HILLER 1991, a junior'
synonym of B. truncata; 6, J, from KAHL l92l a; J a, from CHORIK 1968 . l-4, 6, J ,
Ja, in vivo; 5, silver carbonate impregnation). Bursellopsis species are very fragile and
thus difficult to observe in vivo; the micronuclei are even difficult to recognize in
stained specimens (HILLER 1991) and thus should not be used for species distinction.
1: Ventrolateral view of a representative specimen, 85 pm. 2-4: Shape variants
(98 prm, B0 pm, 58 pm) showing also oral basket and caudal cilia, which are about
twice as long as normal somatic cilia.5: Cilrary pattern and nuclear apparatus in ven-
trolateral view, 85 pm. The macronucleus (dotted) is globular and has 2 micronuclei
attached. The arrowhead marks the adoral organelles (brosse); the arrow denotes the
excretory pore of the contractile vacuole. 6, 7, 7a: "Normal" specimens (6, Ja;
40-60 pffi, l0 prm) and common variant (7, obviously a distorted cell, see Fig. lB, 19
by --> Bursellopsis pelagica) with wide oral aperture. KAHL neither illustrated nor
mentioned caudal cilia; very likely he overlooked them because they are rather short
and thus difficult to recognize. CA = caudal cilia (about 15 pm long), CR = ciliary
rows, CV = contractile vacuole, E - extrusomes, F - kinetodesmal fibres, FV = food
vacuole, MA - rnäcronucleus, OA = oral apparatus, OB = oral basket, IJM - undulat-
ing membrane (circumoral ciliary row).
393

Prostomatida
tlffi/. :
,ffi#
: u
....::ila:::ltt ::: :: * t. l. ' : :::: :::l ...! r.1t ,,:tttlt. l ,: ,: :l ,:' :. l )) \2 :1 ::):. :))l
:: /n ;
M:.:.:: ! ::..:. .:.::: :'::::' :%.::.::- 1:r: r:1
l,j:T!%loffiir{,ffi ,,W|'ii,,,,d!!j:ili:,.:Yü
. ,1 'ti: l. i: t; i.: ,, li t: l; t: l: i: :. t4 ti: %r:r 'l: t- t' ": :: ': i,,:j. t.: u... :. :-: f'r r: :: |- @.._.- n4. i: .- ,:i :i-a:. ,/n.:?tf'.'_iq_r% _:Ä:t-_
10
Bursellopsis truncata (fiorn HILLER 1991. tt 10, silver carbonate inrpregnatior.r; ll, scanning electror.r rnicrograph).8: Ciliary pattern of
ventral side and nuclear apparatus, bar = 20 pm. 9: Anterior polar view of somatic and oral ciliary pattem, bar = 20 pm. 10, 11: Posterior po-
lar views, bars = 20 pm and 1 pm. Explanation of original labelling: cc = caudal cilia, comt = counter-clockwise microtubular ribbons, cvp =
excretory pore of contractile vacuole, CYF = oral basket, DB = adoral organelles (brosse), E = extrusomes, Kr, Kr, Kro, K" = numbered cili-
ary rows, kd = kinetodesmal fibres, ma = macronucleus, mi = micronucleus, OD = double granules (oral dikinetids).
394

Prostomatida
Pelagothrur nov. gen.
Diagnosis:Holophryidaewithlarge,conspicuouscorticalalveoliindistinctrows,everysecondrowof
which is barren, that is, unciliated. Three adoral organelles (brosse) extending meridionally to mid-body, indis-
tinctly enklitoloph-dexiotrop, rightmost brosse row posteriorly continuous with a somatic ciliary row. Division in
freely motile condition.
Type sp eci es: Pelagothrixchlorelligercnov. spec.
E t y m o I o g y: Composite of the Greek words peldgos (living in the sea = planktonic) and thrix ( = hair = cili-
ate s. l.). Feminine gender.
Comparison with related genera: Atfirstglance,thethreespeciesassignedtothisnewgenus
resemble Holophrya, as defined by FOISSNER et al. (1994). However, all true Holophrya species reproduce in
division cysts and their cortical alveoli are never as distinct as in Pelagothrix, that is, are hardly recognizable in
the light microscope. Furthermore, the adoral organelles are usually obliquely arranged and distinctly separate
from the somatic ciliary rows (FOISSNER et al. 1994, HILLER 1993, HILLER & BARDELE 1988). Other
prostomatids, such as ) Urotricha, -+ Bursellopsis, -+ Longitricha an,d Longifragma, which divide, like
Pelagothrix, in freely motile condition, have all cortical alveoli ciliated (FOISSNER & PFISTER 1997, FOISS-
NER et al. 1994), while a row of barren alveoli is between each two ciliated rows in Pelagothrix.
O t h e r s p e c i e s a s s i g n a b I e t o P e I a g o t h r i x: The gengs is established with two new species
described below, viz., P. chlorelligera and P. plancticola. The conspicuous cortical alveoli as well as body size,
symbiotic algae, and sparse caudal cilia relate P. chlorelligerato Urotricha alveolata KAHL, 1926, which is
thus transferred to the new genus: Pelagothrix alveolata (KAHL, 1926) nov. comb. (Fig. 4-6 by -+tP. chlorel-
ligera).
Pelagothrix chlorelligera nov. spec.
D iag no s i s: Size invivo about50x 35 pm. Orderly obovoidal andcircularintransverseview. Cortical alve-
oli 1.G-1.5 pm thick. Body extrusomes about 10 x 0.3 pm, meridionally arranged. Many symbiotic green algae.
24 somatic ciliary rows on average. One ring of ciliated perioral dikinetids continuous with anterior end of so-
matic ciliary rows. Oral basket conical, composed of 20-30 fine rods.
Type location: HöglwörtherSee,asmalllakeihsouthemBavaria,Germany(47'49'N, 12'50'E).
Type s lide s: Three slides (1 holotype,2paratypes) withprotargol-impregnatedspecimenshavebeende-
posited in the Oberösterreichische Landesmuseum in Linz (LI), Austria. The slides are of mediocre quality.
Thus, we declare Figures 13-24 as additional type material.
E ty m o I o g y: chlorelligera(Chlorella bearing) because of the symbiotic green algae.
D i f f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (detailed morphometric data, see Table on nextpage)
1) Size in vivo 40-60 x 30-40 pm, usually about 50 x 35 pm.
2) Body very regular obovoidal, that is, looking exactly like an inverted chicken egg; circular in transverse view
(Fie.7, 13).
3) Macronucleus in or near mid-body, globular. One micronucleus (Fig. 7, 10., fl ,20).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end with many fine canals extending anteriorly along ciliary rows; sin-
gle,conspicuous excretory pore in or near pole centre (Fig. J,8, 17).
395

Prostomatida
5) Cells green due to symbiotic algae 4-7 pm across (Fig. l, 7,13,17,21). Extrusomes about 10 x 0.3 pm, that
is, long but very fine and thus easily overlooked; slightly curved, arranged in meridional rows, attached to
pellicle and directed to body centre (Fig. 1,1,9,24).
6) 22-27 (mean = 24) meridional ciliary rows, each commencing with a basal body pair (perioral dikinetid),
loosened in posterior pole area bearing some scattered, 20 pm long caudal cilia. Normal somatic cilia l0 pm
long and widely spaced. Cortex with very conspicuous, 1.0-1.5 pm thick zone of pentagonal to hexagonal al-
veoli, which form bright fringe and impregnate occasionally with protargol (Fig. 1-3, 7 , 10, ll, 11-20, 22,
23).
1) Oral opening in centre of anterior pole, circular. Oral basket inconspicuous in vivo, conical, composed of
20-30 fine rods extendirig to mid-body (Fig. 7,14,16,17). Undulating (paroral) membrane composed of
2V30 granules (monokinetids or dikinetids), each associated with an about 1 pm long ciliary stump, which
can swing to and fro; encircled by perioral dikinetids bearing shortened (about 4 pm) cilia and being continu-
ous with somatic ciliary rows. Brosse (adoral organelles) indistinctly enklitoloph-dexiotrop (1-2 ciliary rows
abut at steep angles to right anterior brosse end), composed of 3-4 short rows of oblique dikinetids, of which
only the anterior basal bodies bear an about 3 pm long, slightly inflated cilium; right brosse rows usually at
anterior end of 1 or 2 shortened somatic ciliary rows (Fig. 3, l, 10-12, 16, 19,20,22; details of oral ciliature
recognizable only after silver impregnation and not necessary for identification).
8) Moves slowly by rotation about main body axis; does not jump.
Similar species
Similar to Pelagothrix alveolata (KAHL, 1926), which is, however, only 30-40 pm long, has a curious triangular
shape, and lacks somatic extrusomes (Fig. a-6). We do not suppose that the extrusomes were overlooked in P.
alveolata because KAHL even recognized3pm long, epipellicularbacteria, that is, studied the species with oil
immersion. -+ Pelagothrix plancticola differs from P. chlorelligera in body shape (asymmetric vs. very regu-
larly obovoidal) and size (55-100 x 35-65 pm vs. 40-60 x 30-40 pm) as well as in the number of ciliary rows
(3441 vs. 22-27) and oral basket rods (30-40 vs. 20-30). l, 2, 5 (somatic extrusomes present), 6 (cortex with
distinct fringe of alveoli; difference to the large Holophrya species [FOISSNER et al. 1994, p. 322ffl and -+
Urotricha) are key characters for identification.
Table: Morphometric data from Pelagothrix chlorelligera.
Characterr Mean M SD SE CV Min Max n
Body, length 41 .6 42 4.4 0.9 10.6 35 50 23
Body, width 33.2 J/1 J/1 3.2 0.1 9.6 26 39 23
Macronucleus, length 13.6 t4 1.9 0.5 13.9 ll l8 l3
Macronucleus, width t2.5 12 1.1 0.3 9.0 ll l5 l3
Distance from anterior end of cell to ante-
14.1 14 4.1 1.3 33.4 6 23 l3
rior end of macronucleus
Symbiotic green algae, diameter 4.0 4 0.6 0.2 14.4 J/-l 5 l3
Somatic ciliary rows, number 24.2 24 t.4 0.3 5.8 22 2l IB
Field specimens after protargol impregnation. Measurements in pm. CV = coefficient of variation inVo,M = median, Max = maximum,
Mean = arithmetic mean, Min = minimum, n = number of specimens investigated, SD = standard deviation, SE = standard error of mean.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: As yet found only in a small, eutrophic lake in Bavaria, where it occurred in con-
siderable numbers near the lake bottom mainly in autumn, when water was almost anoxic.
396

Prostomatida
Autecological data and ecological summary: Possibly feeds mainly on its own symbiotic algae because all
specimens checked contained some food vacuoles with symbiotic algae in various stages of digestion. Biomass
of 106 medium-sized specimens about 27 m9
t
SA
I I
,/UM
(u*-DG
1.ru
lrR
a
'g
pelagothrix chloreltigera(1,3, in vivo). 1,2: Optical sectiou ancl surlace vicw of'cortex. Note very l'ine sorratic extl'usolnes
(10 x 0.3 pm) and cortical alveoli forming distinct, honeycombed pattem. Between each two ciliary rows is a row of alveoli
without cilia (cp. Fig. 1g, 19,23),amain difference to -+ urotricha and--> Bursellopsis.3z Detail of oral and somatic ciliary
pattem; cilia drawn to scale. C = somatic cilium, AL = cortical alveoli, DG = basal body pair (perioral dikinetid) at anterior
end of somatic ciliary rows, E = extrusomes, FG = fat globules, N = oral basket rod (nematodesma), sA = symbiotic green
algae, UM = undulating membrane composed of minute ciliary stumps'
pelagothrix alveolata(4, 5, from KAHL 1926;6, from KAHL 1930. 4-6, in vivo) differs from P ' chlorelligera in body size
and shape and by the lack of somatic extrusomes. 4, 6z Lateral views, 30--40 pm' Note distinct layer of cortical alveoli' 5:
Anterior polar view showing curious, triangular shape'
391

Prostomatida
OB DG
/
I
I \\(
,\rl\ \ ?c*
tllV
1\ i..tt\
\\N}
I
1 1no
12
Pelagothrix chlorelligera (7-9, in vivo; lG-12, protargol impregnation). 7: Representative specimen, length 50 pm. Note distinct layer of
cortical alveoli (cp. Fig. 13, 17). 8: The contractile vacuole has a conspicuous pore (arrow) and many fine canals extending anteriorly. 9: Ex-
trusome, 10 x 0.3 pm. Use differential interference contrast optics if available. L0-l2z Somatic and oral ciliary pattern in lateral and frontal
view, length 38 pm (Fig. l0). Pelagothrix chlorelligera has 3-4 inconspicuous adoral organelles (brosse), some of which are continuous
with the neighbouring somatic ciliary rows (cp. Fig.19,20,22); each organelle consists ofpaired basal bodies, only the anterior basal body
of which is ciliated. Arrows in ( 1 1) mark ring of basal bodies (undulating membrane) each having associated a ciliary stump and an oral bas-
ket rod (cp. Fig. 3). AO = adoral organelles (brosse), CA = caudal cilia, CR = somatic ciliary rows, CV = contractile vacuole, DG = ring of
basal body pairs (perioral dikinetids) at anterior end of somatic ciliary rows, F = fibre, MA = macronucleus, OB = oral basket.
398

Prostomatida
i!:!i:!:!:irii:!i!:!:!ir:i!i!:!iiii::
!:!:llir!:!:1ilr!:!:i!:lr!:!:ir:::!
::l:ii::!:::ii:::i!:!iit:i:iii::rrii
l.{lri.lXt.lt
i!:ti :!:!:!::titl:!:!:ll:t:!l:ll t::::
i:il::lii::#
N
5 §-r z)
N_
"""N
.W^^^^^lH
Pelagothrix chlorelligera (13, in vivo bright field rnicrograph; l4-l9,in vivo diiterential intert'erence contrast rnicrographs).
13,l{,17: Slightly squeezed specimens showing ovoidal shape, symbiotic green (thus dark in micrographs) algae, macronu-
cleus, and the distinct fringe produced by the cortical alveoli (small arrows in 13,17). The large arrow in (17) denotes the
minute stumps associated with the basal bodies of the undulating membrane; the arrowhead marks the excretory pore of the
contractile vacuole. 15, 16: Oral apparatus in lateral and frontal view. The undulating membrane is very inconspicuous and
con§ists of minute ciliary stumps (arrows). Inside the stump circle are the converging rods of the oral basket. 18, 19 Lateral
and oblique frontal view showing conspicuous alveolar pattern, adoral organelles, and oral opening. Note that only every
second row of alveoli is ciliated (arrows in 18,23; in -+ Urotricha and -s Bursellopsis, each alveolar row is ciliated). AO =
adoral organelles (= 61ott";, CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus, OA = oral apparatus, OB = oral basket, SA =
symbiotic green algae.
399

Prostomatida
UM
20
tti,t.t1r,,11nibffi,,,,,,,,,;,,,,,,,,,,,,''1,4;,1:,i
: "i.: _'" ,,1 :: :!:; ii. :1 ii 'l: !Ll ': !, :1 #: #1l ja1 ) ."1: .'.: l.{ .:i !i ".i;| ü,..' 1,.:. .,, .t: ',:.: :., .|:W ': '., .. .: :.. ;t !r :!/ t- "..
r. : t :
',lX
::t!.i
.r,,.ti
22
Pelagothrtx chlorelligera (2O,22, 24, silver carbonate irnpregr.ralion; 2 I , 23, protargol impregnation). 20, 22: Ciliary pattern of ventral side.
Arrows denote the 3-4 brosse rows (adoral organelles), which are meridionally arranged and composed ofoblique dikinetids. 21: Specimen
with heavily impregnated symbiotic green algae. 23: Pattem formed by the cortical alveoli. Between each two ciliary rows (arrows) is a row
of alveoli without cilia. 24: Extrusomes become strongly curved and thick after silver impregnation (cp. Figures 1, 9!). DG = perioral ring of
paired basal bodies at anterior end of somatic kineties, E = extrusomes, MA = macronucleus, SA = symbiotic green algae, UM = undulating
membrane.
400

Prostomatida
P elagothrix plancticolanov. spec.
D i a g n o s i s: Size in vivo about 80x55pm. Broadly ellipsoidal with anteriorbody portion laterally com-
pressed and obliquely truncate. Cortical alveoli about 2.5 pm thick. Body extrusomes 13 x 0.3 pm, meridionally
arranged. Many symbiotic green algae. 38 somatic ciliary rows on average. One ring of ciliated perioral diki-
netids continuous with anterior end of somatic ciliary rows. Oral basket conspicuously trumpet-shaped, com-
posed of 30-40 fine rods.
T y p e 1o c a t i o n: Pond nearthe village of Maria Sorg, surroundings of Salzburg City, Austria
(N47"47',1813"40',).
Typ e s I i de s: Fourtype slides (twoprotargol-impregnated; two silvernitrate-impregnated, Chatton-Lwoff
technique) have been deposited in the Oberösterreichische Landesmuseum in Linz (LI), Austria. The slides con-
tain many specimens, with relevant cells marked by a black ink circle on the cover glass.
E t y m o I o g y: plancticola (living in the plankton) refers to the preferred habitat.
D i f f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (detailed morphometric data, see Table on next page)
1) Size in vivo 55*100 x 35-65 pm, usually around 80 x 55 pm.
2) Body ellipsoidal with anterior third laterally distinctly compressed and obliquely truncate (Fig. 2a,8,9, l7);
lateral compression not maintained in silver preparations!
3) Macronucleus usually slightly above mid-body, globular. One micronucleus (Fig. 2a, 17-19,33).
r
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior body end with many fine canals extending anteriorly along ciliary rows; sin-
gle, conspicuous excretory pore in or near pole centre (Fig. 2a, 7 , 9 , 12, 2l).
5) Cells green due to symbiotic algae about 5 pm across in vivo (Fig. 2a, 5, n-19,26,33). Extrusomes about
13 x 0.3 pm, that is, long but very fine and thus easily overlooked; slightly curved, arranged in a row each
between two ciliary rows, attached to pellicle and directed to body centre (Fig. 2a, 5, 12,23,26,28, 29). No
mucocysts recognizable in vivo and after application of methyl green-pyronin.
6) 3441, usually about 38 meridional ciliary rows, each commencing with a basal body pair (perioral dikinetid;
rarely two occur), loosened in posterior pole area bearing some scattered, 25 pm long caudal cilia. Normal
somatic cilia about 12 pm long and moderately widely spaced. Cortex with very conspicuous, 2.0).5 trtm
thick zone of pentagonal to hexagonal alveoli, which form bright fringe in vivo and impregnate with silver
(Fig. 2a, 3-:7 , lO, ll, 17 , 18, 2V32).
7) Oral opening in centre of anterior pole, circular (Fig. 2a, 17. 31. 33). Oral basket trumpet-shaped (becomes
conical under cover glass pressure), composed of 3G40 fine rods extending to near mid-body; individual
rods furcate and merging subapically forming W-shaped pattem (Fig. 13, 16). Undulating (paroral) mem-
brane composed of 30-40 dikinetids, each associated with an oral basket rod and a curved fibre extending an-
teriorly and then posteriorly to basket centre to form short, conical (inner) oral basket; encircled by single
row of perioral dikinetids having short (about 7 pm) cilia and being continuous with somatic ciliary rows
(Fig. 2a, 10, I 1, 15, 30-33). Brosse (adoral organelles) rather conspicuous because extending to mid-body
and bearing 34 pm long cilia having a curious, sigmoidal shape (Fig. 14, 22); indistinctly enklitoloph-
dexiotrop (1-4 somatic ciliary rows abut at steep angles to right anterior brosse end), composed of 3-4 (usu-
ally 3) rows of oblique dikinetids having only the anterior basal body ciliated; right brosse row posteriorly
continues as normal somatic ciliary row (Fig. 2a,7 , 10,20,22-24, 26,29); details of oral ciliature recogniz-
able only after silver impregnation and not necessary for identification).
8) Moves slowly by rotation about main body axis; does not jump.
101

Prostom atida
Table: Morphometric data from Pelagothrix plancticola.
Characterr Mean M SD SE, CV Min Max n
Body, length2 1 6.1 79 1.6 1.8 9.9 60 92 1B
Body, width2 59.4 60 1.4 t.1 t2.4 40 l2 1B
Macronucleus, length3 15.5 15 2.0 0.4 13.1 t4 20 22
Macronucleus, width3 t4.3 t4 0.6 0.1 4.4 13 16 22
Distance from anterior end of cell to ante-
24.9 25 6.1 1.4 26.9 11 35 22
rior end of macronucleus2
Symbiotic green algae, diameter3 4.t 4 0.6 0.1 13.5 a-) 5 22
Somatic ciliary rows, number2 3t .5 38 2.0 0.5 5.4 34 4t 20
Somatic ciliary rows, number of cilia in a
39,0 3B 5.3 t.2 13.5 JaaJ 50 1B
row2
Oral basket, length3 32.8 J/.1J/.| 4.t 0.9 t2.4 28 43 22
Oral basket, diameter at distal end3 t4.0 l4 t.1 0.4 tt.9 11 1B 22
Measurements in pm. CV = coefficient of variation in Vo,M = median, Max = maximum, Mean = arithmetic mean, Min = minimum, n =
number of specimens investigated, SD = standard deviation, SE = standard error of mean.
Field specimens after Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation.
Field specimens after protargol impregnation.
Similar species
Easy to identify because of the green colour and the conspicuous cortical alveoli. Pelagothrix plancticols differs
from -+ P. chlorelligera inbody shape (asymmetrical vs. obovoidal) and size (55-100 x 35-65 pm vs. 40-60 x
30-40 pm) as well as in the number of ciliary rows (34-41 vs. 22-27) and oral basket rods (30-40 vs. 20-30).
Pelagothrix alveolata (KAHL, 1926) is only 30-40 pm long and has a curious, triangular shape (Fig. 4-6 by -+
P. chlorelligera). 1,2, 5 (somatic extrusomes), 6 (cortex with distinct fringe of alveoli; difference to the large
Holophrya species [FOISSNER etal.1994,p.322tf] and+ Uroticha) arekeycharactersforidentification.
Originally, we identified this species as Prorodon minutus KAHL, l92Tabecawe of distinct similarities in body
size and shape (cp. Figures 2a,b) and the symbiotic green algae. We assumed that KAHL overlooked the long
but fine extrusomes and the conspicuous alveolar layer. However, very recently, we found a species, which
matches KAHL's P. minutus much better, that is, has small (3 pm), inconspicuous extrusomes and a less con-
spicuous alveolar layer. Thus, we classify the populationdescribed above as new species.
The morphometrics and details of the infraciliature of our population are very similar to Prorodon viridis KAHL,
1927a, as redescribed by ESTEBAN & FINLAY (1996). Unfortunately, these authors did not study live speci-
mens in detail. They neither mention a conspicuous alveolar layer nor provide details on the extrusomes, which
are of crucial importance for species identification in this kind of ciliates. Thus, ESTEBAN & FINLAY's popu-
lation cannot be definitely assigned. However, it is clear that it is rot Prorodon viridis as described by KAHL
(1927a, 1930), which is a junior synonym of Holophrya ovumEHRENBERG (FOISSNER et al. 1994). ESTE-
BAN & FINLAY (1996) used as sole feature the symbiotic green algae and neglected all other characteristics
given by KAHL (1927a,1930). KAHL (1930) definitely states a size of 120-160 x 80 pm (100-130 x 50-60 pm
in 1921a due to a calibration errorr) and 6G-70 ciliary rows. Thus, KAHL's species cannot be identical with the
population investigated by ESTEBAN & FINLAY (1996), which is "typically 70-90 pm long and 50-80 pm
wide and usually has 35-39 ciliary rows".
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: As yet found only at type location, that is, a small (about 20 x 10 m), eutrophic
pond, where a bloom of P. plancticola occurred in early May 1993. ESTEBAN & FINLAY (1996) retrieved
1
KAHL obviously had a calibration error in his early (1926-1928) studies because he corrected all measurements in 1930 and later.
402

Prostomatida
their species, which is probably our P. plancticola (see similar species section), from the stratified water column
of a productive freshwater pond (Priest pot) in England and from two lakes in Spain. The specimens prefer:red
the oxic-anoxic boundary (Fig. 1), exploiting the abundant food resource at depths where they are unhindered by
competition from metazoon predators; the zoochlorellae serve as oxygen supplier. ESTEBAN & FINLAY (1996)
could cultivate the species in test tubes containing autoclaved garden soil, saline soil extract medium, and Chlo-
rogonium as food.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Our specimens fed mainly on pollen grains (Fig. 2a).The popula-
tion studied by ESTEBAN & FINLAY (1996) feeds on what is available and abundant in the water column, that
is, rotifers and their eggs, gastrotrichs, diatoms, euglenids, cryptomonads, dinoflagellates, and ciliates. Biomass
of. 106 medium-sized specimens about 45 r4g (our calculations).
...-.--§§
Prlest Pot
Laguna de la Cruz
prordon vtridis OxYgen (mo/l)
igg/mt O24081012
Figure I (liorn ESTEBAN & FINLAY 1996): Veltical distribution in three tieshwater lakes. The lakes difTer markedly in depth (vertical
axis, in metres) but they each have a vertical gradient of dissolved oxygen (curves of filled dots) which decreases with depth, to complete an-
oxia. In each lake, Pelagothrix plancticola reaches peak abundance close to the oxic-anoxic boundary, although the depth of the latter differs
greatly in the three lakes.
403

Prostomatida
b
4
SA
2a I
CA-
AO
§::
iliil{l.}
'/../ '.,, 1t :. ' . r :. :. ri.t .: _. : -t - . --: :r: r :r .. r :i. :J ,1 :I ,' . 1: tl r. . i .: I t ".\
:' . : a:ata't.^ a: '':;,r, :a ? a a . a'
tI 'r.r 'i. I.! i' :. '' :'t " a r . r . r . : : a . . : . : : -, . . : a 1, , .. ar '] -t r' i . .r .:
'-'rt:tr.-^rta..r
t\
ltltt I
.-atlt..t aa -- t'o1.1-at1^1-altli,a Ittl I I $n
' o . .tt rf^r r ' l a aa t a a 1t a I
it- - 'rtl ö-tl tt r -t - -t. a .a .. aa a 't- a tt tt '- tt - ti t ta § a.l at.. t la. i I ' ' t .t t - .. t 1 a r . l . §- .--l a i t t t r I t ' t '/ t iilii I I I
i".Ot .l.a.l ' - :-' -' .' :'''r' l',' ..',/ ii\\,', i I I ril
I
iaa:era-' o'. ?. ' 'li\ \'r ' rlI
:$),\,r
"
Pelagothrix plancticola (2a, 3-g,originals tiom Salzburg type population; 2b, Prorotlon ntinutus from KAHL 1927 a' 2' 3 ' 5 ' 8 ' 9' in vivo; 4'
6, 7, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation). 2a: LateJ view of a representative specimen, which ingested a large pollen grain' length
g0 pm. For details, see Figures 3, 5.2b: prorodon minutus,60 pm. Note high similarity in shape and size lo Pelagothrix plancticola (2a)' 3'
5: surface view and optical section of cell periphery. The cortical alveoli are 2.v2.5 pm high and thus form a conspicuous' bright fringe
(Fig.Za).Note the very tine extrusomes and a row of unciliated alveoli (arrow) between each two ciliated rows' 4: Silverline system' which
has a very similar pattern as the cortical alveoli. 6, 7: Somatic and öral ciliary pattem, length 80 pm' Arrowhead marks right brosse row'
which is continuous with a somatic ciliary row. Arrow denotes excretory pore of contractile vacuole. 8, 9: Dorsal and lateral view of same
specimen. Note anterior lateral flattening and fine canals which extend anteriorly from the contractile vacuole (cp. Fig. 21)' AL = cortical al-
veoli,Ao=adoralorganelles(brosse),cA=caudalcilia,cP=cytopyge,CV=contractilevacuole,E=extrusomes,MA=macronucleus'
SA = symbiotic green algae'
404

Prostomatida
Ao-'
r\tii./:
--_- n '-\\ 1-:. :
.:
or', ?.... '-.-t'-- =."liii i j
t.
, ,r " ,'u r ,l . .. '.-€ { o ou , :, o :, , -o . :.o i. . . :r :. .. ;. ;. .-c ' :l. a it ita Ü it lt 1t. at " :rt , 't a ,t '. t ., .t r ,r '" ,' ,,,,,"'tt 't
, : : , : : , ' 8s
,,,, . . t: o: : :i ';; fNiM l%:!i "i ", '-, 'ttj t, t', ttl tt, it, :,
F r : : :,',.,,,,
"'
l-..
ttt"t'ir
tttt.!'."..
.,'*';:::-.."
la'-ttti.t'1.
10l.;G-;t :..
a.
oo
Oa
:oo.
O 3: t..
" aaa' o aa oar o
a a o o a
ao ooa "o
lr
.oo .a a
ao aa
ooa O ' oj I 1O a o a
oo al 1O a'
oaa at OO a O afl
.a'
OOB I I OB t\ a
D
Ao
/ I \
.
CR
-toB
14
Pelagothrkplancticola(l0,Chatton-LwofTsilvernitrateimpregnatior.r; ll,l3, 15, l6,protargol impregnation; 12, 14,invivo). 10, 11:Ante-
rior polar views showing somatic and oral ciliary pattem. Arrow marks a somatic ciliary row which abuts to the adoral organelles (brosse).
Note that basal bodies appear paired in silver nitrate prcparations (10), due to an adhering parasomal sac. 12: Surface view showing spatial re-
lationship of ciliary rows, extrusome rows, and canals of the contractile vacuole. 13, 15, 16: Oral basket, which consists of a long outer and a
short inner funnel. 14: Brosse (adoral organelles) region. The brosse cilia are 3-4 pm long and have a curious, sigmoidal shape (cp. Figure
22). AO = adoral organelles (brosse), C = somatic cilia, CC = collecting canals of contractile vacuole, CR = somatic ciliary rows, DG = basal
body pairs at anterior end of somatic ciliary rows, E = extrusomes, IOB, OOB = inner and outer oral basket, UM = undulating membrane.
405

Prostomatida
C,'A'r
17
Pelagothrix plancticola in vivo. 17-19: Bright field and interference contrast micrographs of slightly squeezed specimens showing macronu-
cleus, symbiotic green algae, and the bright fringe formed by the conspicuous cortical alveoli (arrowheads; cp. Fig.2a,20,25,27).20r2L2
Surface and slightly below surface view of same, slightly squeezed specimen showing brosse, cortical alveoli pattem, and many fine canals
(arrows) extending anteriorly from the contractile vacuole. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), C = somatic cilia, CA = caudal cilia, CV = con-
tractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus, OO = oral opening, SA = symbiotic green algae.
406

Prostom atida
Wi
ß
.,,, ,, ** ,' N.
::::::i:""
,,.t... §*r
S; .,:,s
l *::ll, . ".. } .*
t
2,4
E
ci ,
:, :'r$i!r" :i:: :::::., * § *:iii ! d
,: :I§ S:!. i : ! :: : t ::l :::r:l:* ::l{,r S', st i * J , .r '; *'.: ' '. ':* '* $ \*. ,. . !: i. .l : .-. i\!:* S'L ' § § §§ \ ', t !
r\,*:
,4 ir$.,'r*t:
1 , ::, \ tr. 3 §"ii.. . , §r .. ..i..* t|'.",.q...:: :i!: l..: ,,i: .ill iil :. : lllr :*,t iiiili .§-ffi :t, ff. ..:d.rl
-,,' *,l r:* ,i: ,: i* x::: it $B§ S::l ,ll ,! ,.+*l; Hä:OU.
riiii.: ':. :!*ü !::ili itii §l:, ::* .::,:: ,.'j ,i |*:, iiü'e ii:'i#..$§*.r.iiiiiil :r.ir:r:.:* ,'' "
*:,r*,,. .:NiN,r*:::
ri..: Sj U:,tr :j
Pelagothrix plancticola (22,25,21 , in vivo interl'erence contrast rnicrographs; 23, 24.26.28. silver carbonate impregnation). 22: Brosse (ado-
ral organelles) region. Note the curious, sigmoidal shape ofthe brosse cilia (arrows).23,24:Yentral views showing general somatic ciliary
pattem and brosse. Arrows mark somatic ciliary rows abutting to right anterior brosse end. 25,27,28: Surface views showing cortical alveoli,
which lightly stain with silver carbonate (28), at high magnification (cp. Figures 3,5,20). A row of unciliated alveoli (arrow) is between each
two ciliated rows (basal bodies of cilia marked by arrowheads). 26: Oblique anterior polar view showing circular oral opening and brosse. AO
= adoral organelles (brosse), C = somatic cilia, CR = somatic ciliary rows, E = extrusomes, OO = oral opening, which is surrounded by the un-
dulating membrane and perioral dikinetids (cp. Figure 1 1), SA = symbiotic green algae.
401

Prostom atida
k&
&r.
.1::t
,ffi
::::i':: ' ,::,' :"'' ,'"
,ffi., ,, W ry,.. #* DG**
. :::, . ,, .'# t',: . "':, if "l #, fi .j i i :: ,: '."lü*, ", !'f ' :lf ri ). ' WW tW ,Uttd :' :' rw :i::ä. :::::ri:::-i ::' i, :. - t.[,z J :.::: :|1]# ;rji :ti
''r :i,:oi,i,:,, .,,t .t :'' .. , . .,,dffi ttt'-"'W;,.. o .l#|''i ., ri:
**t1,. ,,::t.l't.r. ::i'..*... h'1: ü :''ii;t,.. ,,...r-*ffirr. r"ffii1:' ":';l;:i:',,ffi;",,
.,ti;iii/d")i:..1,.".,1:t:a(f:fifi,f;ii,.,'1;"r"y'.,t1"..1+;,;,i,;,# '",..,:O;#w: :w ,f ,im,,f .f,,' i#f' "ffi
W,....= rn,., W, *t p," # ,,1,ffi,M,r#
29 ü %Wa ' - ':t , !:i i :: T .. ?N ;'; |' / :;.,. : ;: '. r:, : :: :" . l: i:. :1.t 1t f. ä .; ! fl !i * i, .iN . ,f itt : .: tt f ! : 1. *i 4 '::. ! : ':- . . .:, .., .4 :E .j .. ..: &! .! : .: l. .t :w .a f ,t ,+ 4 ft N; ? fu .' //: ... 1/l : .N i , ,i # . ./: N: ," ;:: .j: t . .:at ,.: wa ' .: .l : t:: ti .!: . lr tj ' ,t : i|r ..:: i4t i. n: ü.: i .j :i| :., i ': : ' k " iY, . tt i.:M n. ..W . . ,,., #:.:l, . '& .W| :fw t4 ': jf t f :i '7r., : f; Y, ;, iy, i'. :: :1t ,i ,r !,i |1 . .ti : , : .i1 tT ., .f t1 'n ß!: tf1 4.: :W i i, ,W:: 4, ,r:. .: t: .: ..' ' 1 .:. , r, :i: t; i.f i , 1 & 'f, j .fl ,i '. f| l i. f it,t ,' i, tf1 ,, . t ,i. f ' , .f ,. 1 ,i , ,*: ,, f , ,f" ,i, ,.1 , i: ,: t .: , 'W "f . 4r , W: ,t af .f ,i : , ., ', #: t 1.* ,&' . !Ä, l :f 'f :i !.:; t:::: . W M,. ,*;t ,. ,? ru: , r. t& , ' r, rt ! r r: b. , t. , tt: ,Wt ,t rt rtr ,: !. 'f t ; t. tr ', &:, i '1 '*& uf ,f i : §'T f* . .. {) #,f:f:ii1ü Atn f4,, 41'.,,, ;. N ,'. f.. f:. i:, u', in t*,ffi tt ?t;; "r, ., *, L f W f& . f i. . i. t rl: l ii ..r ! 'r i * ,:. 1f : :::: , :: ui.:: .::.ä:: :jil ,:l.: il l rl ::l :. l:l4 ll::: "J i: : : arri: ,:l: t::i. "i.l i :; :fi. ' : f.i i:f ,: .Wu W. "r, : f:, , :f# '( ''r:, , J4 \ =*r .' . ,,, ;: "1 @ 7 "4:. i *&, ,
i i l ' w:. f : r i ,i
rn,ry,=ffffi
?ß *'
# *|"
o.,* i:i
+ , g. _-. 'x 1fi .! .1 ;*,# ,,*: ., - il, Ü, 4'*"4
#,
t, ,:,:.
*
*:&: :-f+fri*j::.
*,* l4:;tt::;i :4t'l.tW., #,,.:::;. .,. . .,I
#,it ,l;;, #ti.,'r,r #*,, #* ü . u* 'r, ß4, *.. ..er " . * * . *". . i . ' *w *, :: ,,* ; ,.1 "@ ,'.: o:. , {: k ": i:: t, . f1 '.,f *'. ' 'f&* i.; xt 't +ir | '. :,* *.1 1 : üil,p: . i ; :. .:' i. '; vv", : _1 :i! ?' 1i1 w, .1 . ':#o :, *' , ,.., ,, . , , , .*. J , , §, g, ,, 'r : *iJ r : "*,' ; o . *f ;i :, l: :, i :, "" ; * :E :, t; t: t "; ,. : "' :;v !: t1 !:, tl ; : ;t t " . 1t ,' ', 't . " #X ;tt .f #. 1 . 1 u,f ,''ti ,i 1 ti ,'1 ,1 ,t n; *u;; 7*, ., , ,f*" f rit: W !Wü , ' ", ", ,, ff a, , *X i 1 ,i l: r*o ; *: r:t *:, :t . ,', :'t,i :t ltt l! lt :t , ll # l* t** lt 'i) *, ,):, ',::, ;r; ; ,: *, .:' ,' w ,#. f #i s l,: ,. .l
! ,
Pelagothrix plancticola (29 32, silver carbonate impregnation; 33 35, protargol implegnation.). 29: Ger.relal ventral view showing brosse
extending to mid-body. 30-32: Anterior polar views showing circular oral opening and details oforal ciliature. 33: Optical section showing
some main organelles. Arrowheads mark margin of oral basket, which is conspicuously trumpershaped and consists of a long outer and a
short inner (arrow) funnel (cp. Figures 15,34,35).34, 35: Same specimen in two focal planes to show details of the oral basket, which is
composed of an outer and an inner funnel. AO = adoral organelles (brosse), DG = basal body pairs (perioral dikinetids) at anterior end of so-
maticciliaryrows,E=extrusomes, IOB=inneroralbasket,MA=macronucleus,OO=oralopening,OOB=outeroralbasket,sA=sym-
biotic green algae, UM = undulating membrane.
408

Hyrnenostomata
Dis emato stoma buets chlü r-RureneoRN, 894
1
1894 Disematostoma bütschlii LAUTERBORN, Biol. Zbl., 14:397 (without illustration).
l9O8 Disematostoma bütschlii LAUTERB. - LAUTERBORN, Z. wiss. Zoo1., 90: 651 (detailed, illustrated de-
scription).
1924 Leucophrys ovuzFAURE-FREMIET, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg., Suppl.6: 131 (new synonym).
1931 Clathrostoma (Leucophrys) ovum (FAIJRB-f'R., ß24) - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl.,2l:271 (firstreviser).
7937 Disematostoma bütschlii LAUTERBORN, 1894 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl.,2l:323 (first reviser).
1990 Disematostoma buetschlii LAUTERBORN, 1894 - MARTIN-GONZALEZ, SERRANO & FERNAN-
DEZ-GALIANO, Can. I. Zool.,68: 245 (silver impregnation and morphogenesis).
1994 Disematostoma buetschlii LAUTERBORN, 1894 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informations-
berichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll94: 180 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and
ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
Disematostoma buetschlii sensu DRAGESCO (1910) is D. gyrans DRAGESCO, 1912b, as explained in DRA-
GESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS (1986). We found D. gyrans in Brazil and confirm that is different from D.
buetschlii. Leucophrys ovum is suggested as a new synonym because no character is given that would separate it
unequivocally from D. huetschlii. However, KAHL (1931) transferred itto Clathrostoma.
Differential diagnosis
l) Size in vivo about 110-200 x 90-165 pm, usually around 150 x 85 pm.
2) Body obovoidal, that is, anterior end broader rounded than posterior (Fig. 8, 12, 11).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, reniform (Fig. 2,8, ll).
4) Contractile vacuole subequatorial, with single excretory pore and radial collecting canals (Fig. 8, 12).
s) Cells green due to symbiotic algae, which, however, disappear during winter (BERNINGER et al. 1986). In
anterior end often an indistinct granule accumulation (Fig. 8). Exffusomes (trichocysts) about l0 pm long, pro-
duce distinct fringe (Fig. 8, 17).
6) 64-15 meridional ciliary rows, which abut to a conspicuous, ladder-like preoral and postoral suture, the polar
band, terminating on dorsal side (Fig. 1-3, 9, 13).
t) Oral apparatus distinctly subterminal, about Vq of body length. At left wall of buccal cavity three adoral mem-
branelles, at right an inconspicuous undulating membrane and four to five densely ciliated vestibular ciliary
rows (Fig. 6,1,9; details only recognizable after silver impregnation, not necessary for identification).
8) Swims rapidly.
Similar species
-+ Disematostoma tetraedricum is tetrahedron-shaped and the oral apparatus extends to the anterior end. Disema-
tostoma invallatum GELEI, 1954 is often larger (200-300 x 160-180 pm after GELEI 1954; according to DING-
FELDER 1962, however, only 19-195xll4-I25 pm) and has an ellipsoidal macronucleus (Fig. 16). Disema-
tostoma minorK.\HL,1926 (65-80pm; Fig. 15) and D. bengalensis NAIR, 1911 lack symbiotic green algae.
Disematostoma gyrans DRAGESCO, 1912b (-+ taxonomy) has a pointed posterior end with elongated caudal
cilia and lacks zoochlorellae. -+ Stokesia vernalis has a distinct dorsal hump, an ellipsoidal macronucleus, and 3-5
conspicuous excretory pores. Frontonia spp. have an ellipsoidal macronucleus and an indistinct dorsal suture. 2, 3,
5 (symbiotic green algae) are key characters for identification.
409

Hymenostomal.a
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic in stagnant waters, especially ponds. occasionally in running waters.
The locus classicus is near Mainz, Germany, where LAUTERBORN (1894, 1908) discovered D. buetschlii in
ponds near the Oberrhein and in the harbour of the village of Oppenheim, with highest abundances from Novem-
ber to April; thus, he considered it as characteristic for the winter plankton. KAHL (1931) also found it during
winter, especially among macrophytes. His population lacked symbiotic algae, which disappear during winter
(BERNINGER et al. 1986). FAURB-f'RBUrcf 0924) discovered the synonym , Leucophrys ovum, in clear ponds
near Paris, France. BERNINGER et al. (1986) counted 5000--50 000 ind. Ll in the oxic-anoxic boundary of a pro-
ductive pond (Priest Pot, England) during summer stratification (Ecograms a, b). After the collapse of the thermal
stratification and the oxygen gradient, D. buetschlii spread through the water column (Ecogram c; see this paper
for details). Further records: pond (March) and puddle (November) near Sofia, Bulgaria (DETCHEVA l9l6a: in-
correctly spelled Diesematostoma bütschlii); >100 ind. l-' in a pond near Basle, Switzerland, during April (RIG-
GENBACH 1922): Khachinchai Reservoir, Azerbaijan (ALEKPEROV 1984a); Ukrainian ponds (OLEKSIV
1985, 1985a, OLEKSIV et al. 1986); White Clay Creek, USA (PATRICK 1961); ponds in Mount Desert Island,
USA (MCCASHLAND 1956); Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (CUNHA 1913); with 8.8 7o frequency in a pond in Camer-
oon (NJINE 1977); Rhine River, Germany (SCHMITZ 1986); Guadarrama River, Spain (MARTIN-GONZALEZ
etal.1990:Fig. l-7);CapeFearRiver,NorthCarolina,USA(CAIRNS&YONGUE.1973).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Mixotrophic; feeds on algae and autotrophic flagellates llke Chlo-
rogonium elongatum, Chrysococcus rufescens, Peridinium and Trachelomonas (BERNINGER et al. 1986, LAU-
TERBORN 1908, MARTIN-GONZALEZ et al. 1990), in sapropelic waters also on purple bacteria (BICK 1912a).
Biomass of 106 specimens about 400 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1994). PATRICK (1961, without illustration) re-
corded D. buetschlii from a small, shallow river in North America under following conditions: pH 8.4, ,16 mg 1-r
C**,12 mg l-r Mg2*, 0.007 mg I' NH3-N, 0.012 mg l-r NOz-N, 1.9 mg fr NO:--N, 7.4 mglt CL,0.024 mg l-r Fe 2*.
Euplanktonic throughout the year, often peaking during winter. Reliably recorded from Europe only. Saprobic
classification according to FOISSNER et al. (1994): betamesosaprobic (o = l, b = l, a=2,I = 3, SI = 3.1).
O, (lmol/liter)
100 200 300 12 AUG 1985
Temperature (oC) NH4+/NOg (pmotftiter) Free COz (mmol/liter)
m12 13 14 1 00 200 300 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
ffi
o
oI
oI
^3 oI
E
oI
o I
o
(I,
Io
:) \
o to
\
C
Ear)- o\
E o\
o
o o
\
E
o b
oI
o
oc1 I
(§' I
\ oI
U'
ä
ol
NHa* \
o\.
/
o
IIL-5J 0 100 100 50
No. of cells in 10 ml
a
0.1 1 10 100
1000
Light tevet fuE m-2sec-I)
Ecogram aof Disctrtutostonr ltuctscltlii: Vertical distribution ot zoochlorcllae-bearing ciliates in Priest Pot. Further details -+ Ecograms b, c.
4to

Hymenostomata
02 fumol/liter)
o 100 200 300 5 SEPT 1985
Temp 1er 2at ure 13(oc o) NH4+/N 1O 0C ( Pmotr!iter) Fr oee oC .O z ( .m m 1.o 5l/ l 2it .e Or)
0 200 5 1 o
ffi
i
-j o
oI
I oI
/02
Io r öI
^3
E o öI
NOt
o o I \ o
(§ i \
I
of oI /o \
o\
Co, jI /o
EE :! o
oo \ o
E rF lI oI
o
o
oI
o (c)1 it o .a I o\
§, lt o! EUP
.o9 \
LI
--O J
lt ot NHa* i- {
lLod
/
lt ll ll
50 100 100 50
No. of cells in 10 ml
10 b
Light level (pE ,-'sec{)
15 NOV 1985
pE m-2sec-l mmol/liter
o
0.1 1 1.O
l-]
I
I
l I
i
o
3
E I I Free COz
o o I
§, i,-2
Acar.
3 I
o t NOo
rrO I
6z
Disem.
E
E I
o
o I I
E
o
NHf,
] I
(l)
o2
ct
CU j
o I
ö
I
lr"*0. Euplotes
Frontonia
4.5 5.5 500 50 ll 50 c
oc in 10 ml
Ecograms ol Discntutostottru bucrsthlii(a-c, fi.om BERNINCER et al. l9tl6). b, c: Vertical distribution of zoochlorellae-bearing ciliates
and various abiotic factors in Priest Pot (England) on September 5, 1985 and November 15, 1985. Samples were taken between 0930 h and
1030 h. The oxic-anoxic boundary is 1.1 m from the sediment surface. ACAR = Acaryophrya sp., DISEM = D - buetschlii, EUP = Euplotes
daidaleos, ST = -+ Stokesia vernalis.
4tt



Hymenostomatir
OA
MA
i#/ii
t!
l!r lli
it
Ii
l,lr
li
CV
SA
0
17
Disematostoma buetschlii in vivo (8, 9, 13, 14, fror-r-r L-A[JTrElRBORN l9[08; 10, from KAHL l9 wn at'ter LAUTE,R-
BORN 1908; 77, 12, from KAHL l93l; ll, from FAU]RE,-FFR:EMIET 1992"l,4). 8-10: Ventral view m. 11: Right lateral
view. 12,, 13: Dorsal views, 150 pm, 130 prm. 14: The: corteex is rectanrgg;uulliarly patterned with ,cili ing from mesh cen-
tres. 17: Ventrolateral view of the proposed synonym, ILeuco'o,pp1hrys ovutm'r/t l , )tt25 ,pm.
Disematostoma minor in vivo (from KAHL l93l). 15: Ventral view, 75 pm.
Disematostoma invallatum in vivo (from DINGFELDER 1962). 16: Ventral view, 145 pm. Note the ellipsoidal macronu-
cleus, the most important difference to Disematostoma buetschlii.
C = somatic cilia, CV = contractile vacuole with radial collecting canals and single excretory pore on dorsal side, E = extru-
some fringe (trichocysts; resting about 10 pm, ejected up to 60 pm long), MA = macronucleus, OA = oral apparatus, SA =
symbiotic green algae (zoochlorellae), SU = suture (po1ar band).
113

Hymenostomata
Dis e mato stoma tetrae dricum G AUpfr,-FREMTET, r9z4) KA:gtL, ts3t
1924 Leucophrys tetraedrica FAURE-FREMIET, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg., Suppl., 6: 128.
l93l Disematostoma (Leucophrys) tetraedrica (FAURE-FR.,1924) - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl.,2l:323 (combining
author; first reviser).
l94l Disematostoma tetraedrica FAURE FREMIET 1924 - SnÄUBK-HUSEK, Cas. närod. Mus., 116 39 (re-
description from life).
1961 Disematostoma tetraedrica FAURE-FREMIET, 1926 - ROQUE, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg., 95: 460 (redescrip-
tion after silver impregnation; morphogenesis).
1994 Disematostoma tetaedricum (FAURE-FREMIET, 1924) KAHL, l93l - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOH-
MANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll94: 185 ("Ciliate-Atlas",
that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
KAHL (1935, p. 833) classified this species in -+ Stokesia, whose adoral membranelle 3 is, however, composed
of 5-6 widely spaced ciliary rows (cp. Fig. 8 with Fig. 13, 36 by --r Stokesia vernalis). Parastokesia, established
by JANKOWSKI (1967) for Disematostoma tetraedricum, is superfluous (FOISSNER 1988a). Detailed rede-
scription needed.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 100-140 x 50-60 pm.
2) Body tetrahedron-shaped (species name) with 3 roundish anterior protrusions (Fig. l-5).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, reniform (Fig. 1,2,4).
4) Contractile vacuole in mid-body, with radial collecting canals (Fig. 1,2,4,7).
5) Cells green due to symbiotic algae. Extrusomes (trichocysts) fusiform, produce distinct fringe (Fig. 1, 6).
6) About 80 meridional ciliary rows, which abut to a preoral and postoral suture terminating on dorsal side (Fig.
3, s, 7, 8).
7) Oral apparatus extends in anterior body third. At left wall of buccal cavity three adoral membranelles, each
composed of 3-5 narrowly spaced ciliary rows; at right buccal wall an inconspicuous undulating membrane
and three densely ciliated vestibular ciliary rows (Fig. 1, 5, 8; details of oral ciliature only recognizable after
silver impregnation, not necessary for identification).
8) Movement inconspicuous, rotates about main axis with anterior end directed forward.
Similar species
Easy to separate from otherDisematostoma species due to the tetrahedron shape and the apical oral apparatus: -+
Disematostoma buetschlii (obovoidal, oral apparatus subapical), D. invallatum GELEI, 1954 (200-300 x
160-180 pm, macronucleus ellipsoidal, Fig. 16 by -+ D. buetschlii), D. minor KAHL, 1926 (65-80 pm, poste-
rior end pointed, oral apparatus in middle third of cell, without symbiotic algae, Fig. 15 by -+ D. buetschlii), D.
bengalensis NAIR, 1971 (macronucleus U-shaped, without symbiotic green algae). Other similar euplanktonic
hymenostomes are -+ Stokesia vernalis (about 150 pm across, that is, almost circular in ventral and dorsal view,
outline limperlike), -s Marituja pelagica (without symbiotic algae, truncated cone-shaped, macronucleus almost
circular), and Frontonia spp. (anterior end evenly rounded, oral opening subapical). 2, 3, 5 (symbiotic green al-
gae present) are key characters for identification.
4t4

Hymenostomata
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Rare. Euplanktonic in lakes, ponds, and slowly running waters. The locus classi-
cus is in Pr6cy, Oise valley, France, where FAURE-FREMIET (1924) discovered high numbers of Disema-
tostoma tetraedricum, associated with -+ Actinobolina radians,in clean water bodies. §RÄUBK-UUSEK i1r947,
1956, 1951) found D. tetraedricum in betamesosaprobic rivers, and in an alphamesosaprobic water body in
Czechoslovakia. ROQUE (1961) recorded it from a basin (9-12" C) in Gif-sur-Yvette, France, during November
and December. Further records: Sphagnum-pond near Clermont-Ferrand, France (GROLIERE & NJINE 1973);
rare in Lake Cromwell, Canada (PUYTORAC et al. 1972).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on diatoms llke Navicula and Nitzschia (ROQUE 1961).
Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens about 150 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1994). So far recorded only from
Europe and Canada. Rare, mixotrophic euplankter in stagnant and slowly running waters. Saprobic classification
according to FOISSNER et al. (1994): betamesosaprobic (b = 10, I = 5, SI =2.0).
VC
SU
AM1
AM1-3
,CS VC
AM2
V
UM
SA CS AM3
CV
PO
CC
SS
MA
=-t'-t ,. .tr (
* * *'1 :.
E
* tt r i
I
R
EP
SU
CV
CV
Disematostomatetraedricum (1, tiom FAURE-FREMIET 1924;2-4, florn SnÄUef-UUSEK lg41;5-8, trom ROQUE 1961. l-4, in vivo;
5-8, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation). 1, 2, 4, 5: Ventrolateral views, 100-140 pm. 3: Ventral view. 6: Silverline system. Arrow
marks a basal body pair with the associated parasomal sac. 7: Dorsal view showing postoral suture and excretory pore of contractile vacuole.
8: Oral apparatus. Adoral membranelle 3 is composed ofvery narrowly spaced ciliary rows, an important difference Io -+ Stokesia vernalis,
where the ciliary rows are widely spaced making membranelle 3 very prominent. AMl-3 = adoral membranelles, CC = radial collecting ca-
nals of contractile vacuole, CR = ciliary rows, CS = cytostome (mouth), CV = contractile vacuole, E = extrusome fringe (trichocysts), EP =
excretory pore ofcontractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus, OA = oral apparatus, PO = postoral ciliary rows, SA = symbiotic green algae, SS
= silverline system, SU = preoral and postoral suture, UM = undulating membrane, VC = vestibular ciliary rows.
4t5

Hymenostomata
Frontonia leucas GHRENBERG, r833) EHRENBERG, 1838
1833 Bursaria leucas EHRENBERG, Abh. dt. Akad. Wiss. Berl., year 1833:233.
1838 Bursaria (Frontonia) leucas EHRENBERG, 1833 - EHRENBERG, Infusionsthierchen, p. 329 (combining
author).
7908 Frontonia leucas EHRENBERG - BRODSKY, Revue suisse Zool., l6: 75 (redescription from life).
1922 Frontonia leucas EHRENBERG 1838 - PENARD, Etudes Infusoires, p. 131 (redescription from life).
l93l Frontonia leucas EHRENBERG, 1838 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl.,2l: 317 (revision).
1939 Frontonia leucas EHRENBERG, 1838 - BULLINGTON, Arch. Protistenk., 92: 16 (redescription from
life).
1964 Frontonia leucas EHRENBERG - GIL & PEREZ-SILVA, Microbiologia esp., 17: 239 (aühoritative re-
description after silver impregnation).
1986 Frontonia leucas EHRENBERG, 1838 - DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS, Faune uopicale,26:
318 (brief taxonomic monograph).
1994 Frontonia leucas (EHRENBERG, 1833) EHRENBERG, 1838 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN,
Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll94: 169 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is,
taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
Frontonia leucas is rather variable in size and shape and thus often difficult to identify. The most important char-
acters are the single contractile vacuole with long collecting canals and, compared to body size, the small oral ap-
paratus (Fig.2, 15). The extreme size range (120-600 pm!) indicates that it is a sibling species complex, whose
members differ also ecologically, as indicated by the very wide range of occurrence. Furthermore, populations
with symbiotic green algae occur in sapropelic stagnant and alphamesosaprobic running waters, especially during
winter, spring, and autumn (BUCK 1961, CZAPIK 1915, KAHL 1931, §RÄMEK-HUSEK 1957); their status is
not yet clear. KAHL (1931) identified green populations with Frontoniavernalis EHRENBERG, 1833, which
has, however, two contractile vacuoles. HOOD (1921) found that colourless populations cannot be infected with
symbiotic green algae and green populations digest their symbionts when starving. The ciliature of symbiotic and
aposymbiotic specimens is almost identical, the former have 4 (Fig.32), the latter 3 vestibular ciliary rows (Fig.
10). However, if this character can be proved to be constant, chlorotic and apochlorotic populations shold be
separated at subspecies level at least.
Differential di agnosi
s
1) Size highly variable among populations, in vivo 120-600 x 6O-250 pm, usually 150-350 x 70-160 pm.
2) Body obovoidal to ellipsoidal, anterior end broadly, posterior narrowly rounded or slightly pointed. About
2:l flattened, transverse section thus elliptical (Fig. 1-4, 11, 13-16). Anterior end projects distinctly over
right margin in some populations (Fig. 5).
3) Macronucleus in mid-body, ellipsoidal. 2-9 micronuclei (Fig. 24,26).
4) Contractile vacuole on right side in mid-body, with about 10 long, radial collecting canals; one excretory pore
(Fig. 2, 3, 5, ll , 23 , 25).
5) Extrusomes (trichocysts) 6-10 pm long, fusiform, numerous and thus producing distinct peripheral fringe
(Fig. 3, 8, 9, 11, 18,26); attached to comers of cortical ridges. Cells often colourful due to ingested algae and
autotrophic bacteria.
6) 110*120 meridional ciliary rows, those on ventral side abutting to a distinct suture in midline; postoral suture
rather fragile and thus often bursting under cover glass pressure. Posterior end without elongated caudal cilia
(Fig. 2, 4, lO, 15, 16, 19, 24, 25). Cortex rectangularly patterned with cilia, usually single, rarely in pairs,
emerging from centre of meshes (Fig. 21, 22,30).
416

Hymenostomata
7) Oral apparatus subapical, buccal opening pointed arch-shaped and rather small, that is, 1/5 to 1i8 of body
length. At left wall of buccal cavity three adoral membranelles (peniculi), each composed of 4-5 rows of
cilia; at right side an undulating membrane and 3 vestibular ciliary rows, each composed of narrowly spaced
basalbodypairs(Fig.4J,10,12,15,24,21; detailsof oralciliatureonlyrecognizableaftersilverimpregna-
tion, not necessary for identification).
8) Moderately fast swimming.
Similar species
Many Frontonia species have been described, and the genus is in urgent need of revision; some of the more com-
mon species were reviewed by FOISSNER et al. (1994). For F. leucas, we refrain from a detailed species com-
parison because it is reliably identified with the following character combination: (i) single contractile vacuole
with long collecting canals and one excretory pore in mid-body (Fig. 2, 5, 13, 11 , 23), and (ii) a small oral open-
ing as compared to body length (1:5 to 1:8; Fig. 2,4,5,14, 15,24). Inexperienced workers should not confuse F.
leucas with Paramecium spp., which have the oral apparatus in mid-body and two contractile vacuoles. 4 (col-
lecting canals, I excretory pore) and 7 (oral opening small) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in stagnant and running waters throughout the year, often peaking in
spring. Usually, Frontonia leucas lives in the sediment to a depth of 5 cm and in the aufwuchs, but occurs also in
the plankton (especially the hypolimnion) of lakes, ponds, and rivers. Ephemeral waters are also inhabited (for
example, BHATIA & MULLICK 1930, CAIRNS & RUTHVEN 1972) because it is able to form resting cysts
(ZIMMERMANN 1989); however, reliable records from terrestrial habitats are not known (FOISSNER 1998).
Very likely cosmopolitan.
Locus classicus is the zoo of Berlin, Germany, where EHRENBERG (1833, 1838) discovered Frontonia leucas
in mats of cyanobacteria and in the plankton of small ponds. PENARD (1922) found it above black mud. We ob-
served it in two Bavarian rivers and the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University (FOISSNER et al. 1994; Fig. 13,
14, 11-19). Records from lake and pond plankton: quantitatively important in the hypolimnion of a eutrophic
lake (Piburger See) in Tyrol, Austria, with up to 269 ind.l-r in 12m from March to August (PSENNER &
SCHLOTT-IDL 1985, SCHLOTT-IDL 1984, ZIMMERMANN 1989; Fig. 15, 16); very abundant in a eutrophic
lake in England with 1200 t 980 ind. ml-r in 1-3 m during August (0 mg Ir Oz and 3 mg l-r HzS in 2 m; BARK
& WATTS 1984); up to 500 ind. l-r in the eutrophic Perrington Pool at microaerobic conditions during July
(BARK & GOODFELLOW 1985); hypolimnion of Esthwaite Water, a small eutrophic lake in the English Lake
District (BARK 1981; + Ecogram); up to 3000 ind. l-r in the hypolimnion and the anaerobic sediment of the hy-
pertrophic Priest Pot, England (FINLAY et al. 1988, GOULDER 1912, -+ Ecogram [d] by Stokesia vernalis);
hypolimnion(?) of the eutrophic Lake Aydat, France, in July and November (SIME-NGANDO & HARTMANN
1991, SIME-NGANDO et al. 1990; population of ALEYA & HARTMANN 1995 with symbiotic green algae);
>300 ind.l-r in 1*3 m of a eutrophic lake (Plußsee) in northern Germany during May (RECK 1987); in oligo-,
meso- and eu- to polytrophic lakes in Germany (PACKROFF 1992, PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991); up to
13 000 ind. l-' in a eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Bonn, Germany, during October (WILBERT 1969);
mass occurrence in a Romanian lake (LEPSI 1932; body length 100-120 pm, length of oral apparatus about
35 pm indicating misidentification); with low abundance (1 ind. lr) in the eutrophic Lake Kinneret, Israel (MA-
DONI 1990); hatchery ponds and betamesosaprobic ponds in Russia (ALEKPEROV & KRYUCHKOV 1982,
OLEKSIV 1985); Lake Sevan, Armenia (ZHARIKOV 1983); Azerbaijanian and Ukrainian reservoirs (ALEK-
PEROV 1982, 1983, 1984a, NEBRAT 1980); Russian reservoirs (MORDUKHAJ-BOLTOVSKAJA 1965,
ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992); common in the littoral and pelagial of Lake Baikal (GAJEWSKAJA 1933); Lake
Donghu, Wuhan, China, during spring and autumn (GONG 1986); up to 1000 ind. 1-r in a eutrophic pond of the
USA from July to November (WANG 1928).
411

Hymenostomata
Records from potamoplankton: up to 3000 ind. l-' in the Hungarian section of the Danube River during April,
June and October (BERECZKY 1911b); Po River at Viadana, Italy (FERRARI et al. 1989; identified by P. MA-
DONI); Vistula River, Poland (KLIMOVICZ l98l); Kuban River, Russia (KORNIYENKO 1972); Tennessee
Rivers, USA (LACKEY 1942).
Benthic records from running waters and sediments of stagnant waters, see FOISSNER et al. (1994). Rare in
bogs (GROLIERE 1978, LEPSI 1957, MESSIKOMMER 1954), brackish waters (tideland ponds, estuaries), and
sewage treatment plants (details, see FOISSNER et al. 1994). One uncertain marine record (LACKEY 1961).
Upper salt limit 0.05 Eo according to DIETZ (1964),0.2 %o according to AX & AX (1961), and 0.8 Eo according
to oBERTHÜR (1937).
Table: Autecological data of Frontonin leucas. Column 1, from CAIRNS (1964; 202 analyses from American running waters), supple-
mented by FOISSNER et al. (1994) with data from PATRICK et al. (1967;7 analyses from American running waters), PATRICK (1961; 5
analyses from American running waters), NOLAND (19251. 9 analyses from American freshwaters), and LACKEY ( 1938a; 5 analyses from
a polluted American river); column 2, from COLE (1955; 3 analyses from lakes of the USA); column 3, from DETCHEVA (1978, 1982,
1983c; many analyses from Bulgarian rivers); column 4, from MOLTMANN (1978; ? analyses from a model ecosystem); column 5, from
MADONI & GHETTI (1981; 6 analyses from an Italian river); column 6, from NJINE 0977;33 analyses from Cameroon freshwaters); col-
umn 7, from BICK & KUNZE (1971; summary of literature data); column 8, from FOISSNER et al. (1994;4*1 analyses from Austrian run-
ning waters).
Parameters References
- l
1 2 J 4 5 6 8
Saprobity P,a,b o,b,a o-b, b
Frequency (7o) 60 1-5 2.5-2.9 9-94 5
Temperature ('C) 4-35 5-15 t0-26 22-25 t8-2t t9-23 r-32 3-r3
pH 4.5-9.0 6.8-9.3 7 .l-7.6 6.8-8.3 1.9-8.4 5.0-6.3 7 .2-9.0 t .t-8.1
o, (mg 1') r.4-tr 2.6-t5 3-10.4 0-t2 5.3-1 1.3 0.5_4.1 0-25 10.5-13
Oz (saturation 7o) LT-t69 22-r40 30-103 0-234 98-106
BoDs (mg l-') 0.5-40 2.2-13.4 1.2-3
COD (mg l') 3.3-39 I -37
HzS (mg I') 0-1 0-5.7
Ca2* (mg I ') 3150 34-8r
Mg'* (mg l') 3-2000 0-52
Total hardness (dH') 0.3-56 6.1-lgl 0.4-t.2 3.2-t2.6
HCO: (mg t') 3.6-18 100-284
COzti"" (mg l-') 1-15 5_4.0 t-3 0-58
l')
P (mg 0-1.12 0.03- 1.43 <0.012 0.13-12 0.532 <0.r22
NH+*-N (mg l') 0-10 0.0s-8 0-5.3 t2-t4 0.2-2 0-4.7 <0.t2
NO: -N (mg 1') 0-l 0.1-0.2 0-l 0 0.t-2.1 0.4-r.4
NOz -N (mg l') 0-1.5 0.01-0.4 0-0.13 t-t .t <0.013
Cl (mg 1') 0-2500 2-t6 tt-28 7 -5tt r-54
Fe2* (mg I ') 0-52 0.02-t.5
SO+2 (mg I') 0490 0-30 26-t32 5-33
' *g l'. 2Po43--P. 3 P,o,ur
4t8

Hymenostomata
Autecological data: Polyphagous (BICK & KUNZE l97l), that is, feeds on heterotrophic and autotrophic bac-
teria and flagellates (BARK & WATTS 1984, BUCK 1961, CZAPIK 1975), algae up to 50 pm across (FINLAY
et al. 1988, SIME-NGANDO & HARTMANN 1991), diatoms (GAJEWSKAJA 1933), Arcella and Dffiugia
GÜRGER 1908, SCHMIDT 1913), and ciliates (Coleps, Aspidisca; KUSANO 1985); large specimens even prey
upon rotifers (BERECZKY 1977b, FOISSNER etal.1994, KAHL 1931). DEVI (1964) described cannibalism in
an Indian population. Generation time 1-3 days (OKADO 1956). Biomass of 106 about 400 pm long specimens
1720 mg (NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991), and only abott 270 mg when 200 x1O x 35 pm (FOISS-
NER et al. 1994). Respiration rate about 50 pl Oz ind.-' h-r (20'C, 614000 pm3 biovolume, respectively, about
100 ng dry mass per cell; FENCHEL & FINLAY 1983, LAYBOURN & FINLAY 1976). WILBERT (1969) as-
sumes growth inhibition at <1 mg 1-r Oz; however, reliable observations are available on high abundances under
microaerobic conditions (see above and FOISSNER et al. 1994). In laboratory experiments, Frontonia leucas
can survive at anaerobic conditions for about 20 h (BARK & GOODFELLOW 1985). 50 pg I I Pb and 100 pg I I
Zn, l00pg1r Pb and 2}'pgl't Zn, and 500pgl-' phenolic, respectively, benzoic acid are not tolerated
(FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS & ANTONIO-GARCIA 1986, GARCIA et al. 1981). Autecological data + Table.
Miscellaneous autecological data: 4.8-14.5" C (>300 ind. l'' at 14.5'C), pH 7.3-9.3 (9.1), 2.6-14.5 mg 1-r Oz
(11.8 mg It),22-140 7o Oz saturation (115 Vo),55-170 pg l-r NH+* (Plußsee, Germany; RECK 1987); pH 6.6-8.9
(maximum at pH 6.5), 4.0-5.7 (4.9)' C, 0-8.9 (0.9) mg I I Oz, 0.1-2.3 (0.28) mg l-r NH4*-N (Piburger See in Aus-
tria; SCHLOTT-IDL 1984, ZIMMERMANN 1989);7-22'C, pH6.9-8.2,6.8-16mglr Oz, 0-28.2mgll
HCO:,0-0.8mgl-rNH+*-N,0.4-l.4mglrNO:-N,0.02-O.07mgl-1 NOz--N (Danube River in Hungary;
BERECZKY 1911b).
Ecological summary: Recorded from all continents and a great variety of habitats. Basically a benthic organism,
which, however, avoids anaerobic habitats but can become numerous in microaerobic hypolimnia, where it is of-
ten associated with strict microaerophiles, such as Loxodes spp. and Spirostomum spp. Common in all seasons,
usually peaking in spring; eurythermic, oligo-euryhaline, and euryoxibiontic because mass occurrence in beta- 1o
alphamesosaprobic running waters have been reliably reported. Omnivorous and euryoecious, possibly due to
sibling species formation, and thus almost useless for water quality assessment: betamesosaprobic to alphameso-
saprobic (o =2,b =3, a = 3, P = 2, I= l, SI = 2.5; FOISSNER etal. 1994). Ecological studies should separate
chlorotic (with symbiotic algae) and apochlorotic populations, which probably belong to different species.
14 2l l1 l8 t3 20 2l
JUNE AUGUST STPTEMBER
the English Lake District (from BARK 1981). Maximum population 670 ind. l-r.
419

Hymenostomata
OA
SU oA-
MA
MI
CV
FV
MA-
CC
AM1-3
SU_
-oA
at. r.| ,,
6 AM1
at !' f(
AM2
it --FV
a AM3 E
rIt
SU_
CS
UM t#
.:
"qrI,,
.-o; ff
{i?r: t:
(ao3
.;'l
<.Ä
§
§{
S
;i;ii
(< T
(t<
ri- (
i;
t-
-t
i§
10
Frontonialcucas(1, fTomEHRENBERG 1833; 2,6,7,12,fromKAHL 1931; 3, ll,fromTÖNNIGES l9l4;4,5,from
FOISSNER et al. 1994;8, 9, from SCHEWIAKOFF 1889; 10, from GIL & PEREZ-SILVA 1964. l-3,6-9, 12, in vivo; 4, 5,
10, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation; 11, mercuric chloride-preserved and stained specimen). 1: Right lateral view,
200 pm. 2-5: Ventral views, 300 pm, ? pm, 200 pm, 200 pm. Note that the oral apparatus is rather small (30 pm) as com-
pared to body length (200 pm; Fig. 4). 6: Diagram of oral apparatus. 7: Arrangement of oral basket rods. 8: Contractile
vacuole with single excretory pore (arrow). 9: Resting (a; 6 pm) and ejected (b; 47 pm) trichocysts with hook-shaped end
(cp. Figures 18,26).10: Ciliary pattem of oral apparatus and adjoining somatic ciliary rows, which are partially composed
of basal body pairs, of which, however, only one basal body is ciliated. The third dot of the triplets is a parasomal sac. 11,
12: Cross sections in the oral region. AM1-3 = adoral membranelles (peniculi), CC = collecting canal of contractile vacuole,
CS = cytostome, CV = contractile vacuole with long collecting canals, E = extrusomes (trichocysts), EP = excretory pore of
contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuoles, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, N = nematodesmata (oral basket rods),
OA = oral apparatus, PO - postoral ciliary rows, §lJ = preoral and postoral suture, UM = undulating membrane, VC = vesti-
bular ciliary rows, X = margin of mouth.
420

Hymenostomata
1S
Frontonin leucas (13-18, fiom FOISSNER et al. 1994 Ll3, 14, 17, 18, kindly supplied by H. BLATTERER; 15, 16, culture kindly supplied
by F. NEIDLI. 13, 14, in vivo bright field micrographs; 15, 16, scanning electron micrographs; 17, 18, in vivo Normarski differential inter-
ference conffast micrographs). 13: Dorsal view of a freely motile specimen showing body shape. 14: Dorsal view of a slightly squeezed
specimen showing postoral suture (arrow) and contractile vacuole (arrowhead). The dense granulation is caused by the extrusomes. 15, 16:
Ciliary pattem of ventral and dorsal side, 160 pm. Note the small, as compared to the length of the cell, oral apparatus, which is near the an-
terior end (important difference to Paramecium spp., where it is near mid-body). 17: The contractile vacuole has very long, radial collecting
canals (arrows), which is a main species character of F. leucas.18: Ejected extrusomes have a hook-shaped distal end. CV = contractile
vacuole, FV = food vacuole, OA = oral apparatus.
42t

Hymenostomata
EP
25
Frontonia leucas (19--25, fiom FOISSNER et al. 1994 [9, kindly supplied by H. BLATTERER]. 19, 23, in vivo; 2O-22,scanning elecrron
micrographs; 24,25, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation). L9,20: Dorsal anterior portion showing ridges between ciliary rows and dis-
tal end of preoral suture. 21: Excretory pore (arrow) of contractile vacuole. 22: Demembranated and partially deciliated portion of cell surface
showing rectangular cortical pattem and extrusomes (arrows) in the ridges. 23: Slightly squeezed specimen showing the long collecting canals
of the contractile vacuole. 24r25t Ciliary pattem of ventral and dorsal side. CC = collecting canals of contractile vacuole, CR = ciliary rows,
CV = contractile vacuole, EP = excretory pore of contractile vacuole, OA = oral apparatus, SU = preoral and postoral suture.
422

Hymenostomata
ffi_oA '. l' 1:. ... M1
AM2
x*
[##>sA .. .l
.t
$ffiMA UMTatr rar : :. . :k . . .' '. .
\,/29 :.i' ,.
.a r ta' . t
EP
8q, CR
VC ').,.
t.
CR-:
,
Frontonin leucas (26,27, from FOISSNER et al. 1994;28, fiom PENARD 1922;29, fiom SCHEWIAKOFF 1889; 30, from ROQUE 1961;
31,32, from DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS 1986.26, in vivo Normarski differential interference contrast micrograph; 2'1, scan-
ning electron micrograph; 28,29, in vivo; 30-32, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation). 26: Macronucleus and extrusome frir.ge.27:
Oral apparatus at high magnification (cp. Figure 32). Arrow marks densely ciliated vestibular rows right of oral opening. 28, 31: Ventral
views of zoochlorellae-bearing populations, ? pm, 145 pm. Whether the chlorotic populations are conspecific with the apochlorotic ones
needs detailed investigations. 29: Symbiotic green algae, 4 pm. 30: Silverline system. Arrowheads mark a basal body pair, arrow denotes the
associated parasomal sac. 32: Oral apparatus of a zoochlorellae-bearing population with four vestibular ciliary rows. AM1-3 = adoral mem-
branelles (peniculi), CR = somatic ciliary rows, E = extrusomes, EP = excretory pore ofcontractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus, OA = oral
apparatus, PO = postoral ciliary rows, SA = symbiotic green algae (zoochlorellae), SS = silverline system, SU = preoral and postoral suture,
VC = vestibular ciliary rows, UM = undulating membrane, X = mouth margin.
423

Hymenostomata
Histiobalantium bodamicum KRATNER & MüLLER, rsss
1994 Histiobalantium sp. - MÜLLER & WEISSE, J. Plankton Res., 16: 391 (detailed autecological data about
the type population from Lake Constance, Germany).
1995 Histiobalantium bodamicum KRAINER & MÜLLER, Europ. J. Protistol., 31: 390.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 40-60 x 35-45 pm.
2) Body broadly ellipsoidal, sometimes lemon-shaped; dorsal side hemispherical, ventral almost flat with huge
buccal cavity (Fig. 1,7,8, 10, 17*19,29*33). Very fragile, soon becoming distorted and globular under
cover glass.
3) Macronucleus usually in dorsal left anterior portion, ellipsoidal (Fig. 1, 5, 8, 16, 20,28,34).
4) Three contractile vacuoles, one each subterminally at right anterior and posterior end and one at left side near
mid-body (Fi5.1,27).
5) Extrusomes sickle- to thom-shap ed, 34 pm long, sparse, do not form distinct fringe (Fig. I , 2, 9 , 15 , 2l-23).
Cytoplasm without peculiarities.
6) 7V77 (mean = 73.5) meridional rows of l1-l3pm long cilia, regularly interspersed with 25-35pm long,
stiff cilia (tactile bristles; Fig. l, 3-8, 14, 11 -19, 30-35).
7) Oral apparatus very large and deep, occupies almost whole ventral side, Ieft margin straight, right inverted 3-
shaped, like the very prominent undulating membrane; at left anterior end of undulating membrane three nar-
rowly spaced adoral membranelles arranged in parallel and almost at right angles to main body axis (Fig. I,
4-8, 10-l 3, 19, 24, 25, 29-36).
8) Euplanktonic, periods of floating with extended tactile and somatic cilia intemrpted by sudden, short jumps.
Similar species
Histiobalantium STOKES, 1886b is easy to identify because of the large buccal cavity and the stiff (tactile?)
cilia distributed over the cell. All congeners of .i'1. bodamicum live benthically, and most have two macronuclear
nodules: Histiobalantium natans (CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN, 1859) KAHL, 1931 (55-105 pm; 2 macronu-
clear nodules), H. majus KAHL, 1931 (100-250pm; two macronuclear nodules), H. marinumKAHL, 1933
(60-l60pm; usually two macronuclear nodules; also in freshwater), and H. minor WILBERT, 1986c
(40-55 pm; one macronuclear nodule; tactile cilia lacking). Furthermore, all congeners have a different arrange-
ment of the adoral membranelles (character 7), that is, membranelles 1 and 2 form a triangle with membranelle 3
and the anterior portion of the undulating membrane. In Pleuronema spp., which also usually live benthically, the
elongated, tactile cilia are confined to the posterior pole region (detailed description of P. coronatum, see FOISS-
NER et al. 1994, p. 218). 1, 3 (single, ellipsoidal macronucleus), 6 (long, tactile cilia on whole surface), 7 (for
silver-impregnated specimens), 8 (euplanktonic) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in lake plankton. Locus classicus is the northwestern part ("Ueberlinger
See") of Lake Constance, Germany, where it was regularly observed since 1987 at the deepest site (147 m). Num-
bers exceeding 1000 ind. l-r were recorded in the uppermost 20 m of the water column during summer and autumn
(-+ Ecogram a); abundances were below detection limits at 100 m (detailed ecological characterization of the
Lake Constance population, see autecological data). KRAINER & MÜLLER (1995) found H. bodamicum also in
oligotrophic and mesotrophic groundwater ponds in Carinthia and Styria, Austria, where it occurred in low num-
bers (10-320 ind. lr) throughout the year, except for June, August, and September. Maxima were observed near
424

Hymenostomata
the bottom of the ponds in May (240 ind.l') and February (320 ind. l-'; -» Ecogram b). We found tI. bodamicum
in a eutrophic lake (Höglwörther See) in Bavaria, Germany, and in lakes near Salzburg City (Fig. 17-36).
Records of Histiobalantium sp. from lake plankton, strongly indicating that H. bodamicum was observed: eu-
trophic lake (Belauer See) in northern Germany (ZIMMERMANN 1994); small, meromictic lake in Upper Aus-
tria (NAUWERCK 1996); Lake Constance (SCHWEIZER 1994, see Ecogram by -+ Marituja pelagica).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on algae (e. g., Rhodomonas sp.; -+ Ecogram c) and, proba-
bly, bacteria (KRAINER & MÜLLER 1995). Biomass of 106 specimens abolt34 mg during exponential growth
(MÜLLER & WEISSE 1994). MÜLLER & WEISSF, (1994) summarized the ecology of H. bodamicum as fol-
lows: "Histiobalantium was found regularly in the pelagic zone of Lake Constance, FRG, over five annual cycles.
Maxima of up to 6400 cells l-r were recorded during late summer, with similar numbers in the 0-8 and 8-20 m
depth intervals. On an annual average, the population accounted for 10-17 Vo of the total biomass of planktonic
ciliates. In the laboratory, Histiobalantium grew well on a diet of the cryptophyle Rhodomonas sp. Maximum
growth rates obtained in batch cultures were 0.21 and 0.33 day-l at 9 and 18'C, respectively. In situ experiments
using diffusion chambers yielded positive growth rates in autumn and winter. The highest values recorded at the
ambient temperatures 5, 14 and l7o C were 0.17, 0.32 and 0.40 day-r, respectively. Comparing these results with
the different seasonal distributions and higher measured growth rates of other ciliates from Lake Constance, we
conclude that Histiobalantium is a superior competitor at relatively low algal food concentrations".
A
E 2b A \\ I
tn 60 ts \ \
( LU .l /.0 f.20 \ \
5, ^\.
c oh ^ 20 16
r,\
@ 0 --$.
oI\
,"t
E 3 \
a /l I
E(U 2 'o
o
E \
@ 1 \
oI t
g 0 101 \ \
(u \
(C, 6 E \
- C)o L .n \Io
- co , 2 lo r,, t \
Z(Co /\,l-l-\ t--l-
U , 0 --a
t \ a-
oooo /\
ö--1--:-
o-1o 1O-5O 5O-1OO 1OO-25O cells./l {
oo
I ooO o oo 10'.
oo ooo
oo 10 12 1I. doys C
-tr
to.
o o o oo
'
o
ö
lrl IV V VI vil vlil tx x xt XII I lr b
Ecograms of Histiobaluntiun bodunti(unt (a, c, fiom MÜLLER & WEISSE 1994;b, from KRAINER & MÜLLER 1995). a: Seasonal dy-
namics of three algivorous ciliates (-+ Balanion planctonticum, top:' --> Rimostrombidium lacustris, middle; 11. bodamicum, bottom) in the
upper 8 m ofLake Constance from 1987-1991. b: Abundance and seasonal dynamics of H. bodamicurn in two dredged groundwater ponds
of Austria (a = Schwarzl-Badesee, O = Weizelsdorfer Teich). c: Changes in numbers of Histiobalantium (o), Rhodomonas ()), and in cell
volume of Hislio balantium (r) during an I 8o C experiment. Volumes refer to acid Lugol preserved cells, without correction for shrinkage by
fixation. Straight lines represent regression equations, dashed lines were fitted by eye.
425

Hymenostomata
,\
),
AM1
/
,-AVZ
X,-AM3
:::i
:
:i:;21
{.,qr*itti
: :::: i:li:g
; t,ii i ;:q ::l: : i: f it,i :; : l ::
tp..'l'
oide:t ':- -'.Ät1:'fI. l' 'lJ: '..ft...'l
mii:Yi-*r.Sü-'.h^: 'ffi
3a :;§ .i..';/. j^'..
i::"j
{lfi[ffi
i1:;.:;.:::
ffiliit,:#
5
Hßtiobalantium bodamicum (fiom KRAINER & MULLER 1995. 1,2, in vivo; 3-6, protargol impregnation). l: Ventral view, 50 pm. Ar-
rowheads mark contractile vacuoles (large, white blisters). 2: Sickle-shaped extrusome, 3-4 pm long. 3, 5: Dorsal and ventral ciliary pattem,
42-55 pm. Arrow in (3) denotes widening of two ciliary rows at posterior end, possibly the cytopyge. Arrowhead in (5) marks cytostome, ar-
row denotes a serrated line surrounding buccal cavity (cp. Figures 34-36).41 6: Ciliary pattem ofposterior and anterior pole region. AM1-3 =
adoral membranelles, MA = macronucleus, SI = scuticus (structure becoming active during division), UM = undulating membrane.
426

Hymenostomata
lff.i.L...
16
1 S
',',,,,.1t1:,:1,!t:::::lt
Histiobalantium bodamicum (fiom KRAINER & MÜLLER 1995.7-10, in vivo interf'erence contrast micrographs; ll-16, protargol im-
pregnation; bars 10 pm). 7,8, 10: Transverse views showing huge buccal cavity, flat ventral side, and long, tactile bristles (arrowheads in 7,
8). Arrowheadin(10)denotesthelong,bundledciliaoftheadoralmembranelles.9:Cellmarginshowinginconspicuous,sickle-shapedex-
trusomes. 11-13: Ciliary pattem of ventral side showing inverted 3-shaped undulating membrane, adoral membranelles, and ciliary rows.
Arrowhead in (13) denotes the long cilia ofthe adoral membranelles. 14: Ciliary pattem ofdorsal side showing a distinct widening (arrow-
heads; cytopyge?) between two ciliary rows. 15, 16: Optical sections showing extrusomes and macronucleus. AMI-3 = adoral mem-
branelles, BC = large buccal cavity, CR = ciliary rows, E = exffusomes, MA = macronucleus, SI = scuticus (structure becoming active dur-
ing division), UM = inverted 3-shaped undulating membrane.
421

Hymenostomata
25
Histiobalantium bodamicum (ll-23,25, originals of a population fiom the Höglwörther See in Bavaria; 24, unpublished micrograph of
type population. 17 , 18,2V23, in vivo interference contrast micrographs; 1 9, scanning electron micrograph; 24,25, protargol impregnation).
17n 18: Polar views of a floating specimen showing extended somatic and tactile (arrowheads in 17) cilia. Arrows mark buccal aperture on
flattened ventral side. 19: Ventral view showing huge buccal cavity with straight left (arrowhead) and inverted 3-shaped right (arrow) mar-
gin. Asterisk marks long cilia of adoral membranelles. The long, tactile cilia appear as fine threads (cp. Figure 35). 20: Nuclear apparatus.
2l-23: Extrusomes, 3-4 pm long. 24r 252 Crliary pattem of venffal side. Note the very prominent undulating membrane and the adoral
membranelles (arrowhead in 25). BC = buccal cavity, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronuclei, UM = undulating membrane.
428

Hymenostomata
Histiobalantiuru bodamicum (originals of a population fiom a lake [Höglwörther See] in Bavaria. 26-28, in vivo; 29,3 I , 32, scanning elec-
tron micrographs; 30, protargol impregnation). 26l. Low magnification polar view showing entrance to large buccal cavity (arrow). 27 z Total
view showing body shape and one ofthe three contractile vacuoles. 28: Squeezed specimen showing macronucleus. 29,31,32'. Ventral, an-
terior polar, and posterior polar view showing huge buccal cavity with long cilia of adoral membranelles (asterisks) and undulating mem-
brane. 30: Ciliary pattem of ventral side. Arrowhead marks adoral membranelles. BC = large buccal cavity, CV = contractile vacuole, MA =
macronucleus, UM = inve(ed 3-shaped undulating membrane.
429

Hymenostomata
UM
s4
Histiobalantium bodamicum (33-36, originals of a population fiom a lake [Höglwörther See] in Bavaria. 33, 35, 36, scan-
ning electron micrographs; 34, protargol impregnation). 33, 35: Ventral and ventrolateral views showing the characteristic
outline ofthe aperture ofthe buccal cavity, the long cilia ofthe adoral membranelles (asterisks), and the very prominent un-
dulating membrane. The arrows mark some of the long, tactile cilia. The arrowhead denotes a serrated structure shown at
higher magnification in Figure 36. 34,362 Ciliary pattem of ventral side and detail of oral apparatus. Arrows in (34) mark a
crenelated line (cp. Figure 5, arrow), which appears as serrated rib in the scanning electron microscope (arrows in 36). CR =
ciliary rows, MA = macronucleus, UM = undulating membrane.
430

Hymenostomata
M arituj a p e lagic a GAJEVSKA l A, ts28
1928 Marituja pelagica GAJEVSKAJA, Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR, 20: 476.
l93O Marituja pelagica GAJEVSKAJA,I92S - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 18: 177 (first reviser).
1933 Marituja pelagica GAJEWSKAJA - GAJEWSKAJA, Zoologica, Stuttg., 32: 46 (ecology and detailed de-
scription).
1972 Marituja pelagica GAJEWSKAJA,I92S - WILBERT, J. Protozool., 19: 590 (ecology and redescription
after silver impregnation).
1988 Marituja pelagica GAJEWSKAJA, 1928 - KRAINER, Dissertation, p. 105 (redescription from life and
after silver impregnation).
1991 Marituja pelagica GAJEWSKAJA, 1933 PACKROFF & WILBERT, Arch. Protistenk., 140: 130 (rede-
=
scription from life and after silver impregnation).
1994 Marituja pelagica GAJEWSKAJA, 1928 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte
des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll94: 195 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecologi-
cal monograph).
Taxonomy
According to GAJEWSKAJA (1933) and KRAINER (1988), the basal bodies in the posterior third of the cell are
unciliated (Fig. 4, 6). However, WILBERT (1912) and PACKROFF & WILBERT (1991) state that the whole
cell is ciliated, possibly because ofthe presence ofbasal bodies (Fig. 1). Reinvestigation needed.
Differential diagnosi
s
1) Size in vivo 80-160 x7VL25 pm (GAJEWSKAJA 1933), according to PACKROFF & WILBERT (1991)
80-100 pm long.
2) Body slightly dumb-bell shaped or roughly like an inverted truncated cone with oral opening on slightly con-
cave, broad anterior end (Fig. 1,3,4,11, 13, 16,26). Very fragile, becoming globular soon after collection.
3) Macronucleus in anterior body half, vermiform, almost circular (Fig. 3, 4,22,30).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior dorsal body region (Fig. 3, 9, 14, 23).
5) No symbiotic green algae. Extrusomes (trichocysts) fusiforrrr, about 7 pm long, produce distinct fringe (Fig.
3,7, tl,15-18).
6) lO4-121 meridional ciliary rows with cilia pairs so regularly arranged that distinct rings are formed in ante-
rior and middle third. Posterior third also with basal bodies, which are, however, Iess regularly arranged and
very likely unciliated (-+ taxonomy; Fig. 1, 3, 5,9, 10, 74, 1929,33).
7) Oral apparatus in depression on flattened anterior end. At left wall of buccal cavity three long adoral mem-
branelles, at right an undulating membrane and 9-19 densely ciliated vestibular rows (Fig. 2, 10, 11, 15, 16,
19,24,2629,31; details of oral ciliature only recognizable after silver impregnation, not necessary for iden-
tification).
8) Movement conspicuously slow, almost floating, rotates about main body axis.
Similar species
Marituja pelagica is easy to separate from all other planktonic hymenostomes by the polar oral apparatus. Mari-
tuja caudata OBOLKINA, 1995, which looks like -+ Disematostoma buetschlii, is more slender and has a
pointed posterior end (see Figure on next page). -+ Stokesia vernalis (limpet-shaped, macronucleus ellipsoidal)
and -+ Disematostoma tetraedricum (tetrahedron-shaped, macronucleus reniform) have symbiotic green algae,
43t

Hymenostomata
which are, however, often low in number. 2 (depressed oral apparatus on flat ante-
rior polar region), 5 (without symbiotic green algae), 6 ("circular" ciliary rows) are
key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplaaktonic in stagnant waters, rare in rivers. Lo-
cus classicus is Lake Baikal, Russia, where Marituja pelagica occurred at clean, cold
and calm sites throughout the year peaking from late May to Mid-July, that is, dur-
ing spring turnover; in early June, GAJEWSKAJA (1933) counted 70 x 106 ind. I' at
15 m, and some specimens were present even at 600-700 m. During summer, M.pe-
lagica disappeared in the about 12o C warm surface layers; only below 25 m and at
(5o
C some specimens occurred; further data, see EGGERT (1968).
WILBERT (1972) found M. pelagica with low abundance (600 ind.l-') in a
eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Bonn, Germany, from Mid-February to Marituja caudata in vivo,
early April, associated with -+ Linostomella vorticella, -+ Cyclotrichium viride, -+ ägäf*i,l"Jßpm (rrom
Halteria grandinella, -+ Phascoldon vorticella, Strobilidium caudatum, -+ Limno-
strombidium viride, -+ Pseudostrombidium planctonticum, -) Urotricha farcta, and -+ Urotricha pelagica.
KRAINER (1988) recorded M. pelagica from two clean (mean BODs = 0.95 mg l-r) groundwater ponds in Aus-
tria. Further records substantiated by illustrations and/or micrographs: spring plankton of a eu- to polytrophic
Lake (Meerfelder Maar) in Germany (PACKROFF 1992, PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991); eutrophic pond at
Salzburg University, Austria, immediately after break of ice-cover (FOISSNER et al. 1994;Fig. 17, 19:26-29).
Furthermore, we found M. pelagica in various lakes near Salzburg City and in a small lake (Höglwörther See) in
Bavaria (Fig. l1-16, 18-25).
Records not substantiated by illustrations: Lake Constance, Germany (SCHWEIZER 1994, -+ Ecogram); pela-
gial of Ukrainian reservoirs (NEBRAT 1980); benthal of an oligotrophic Latvian lake (LIYEPA 1984b); Lake
Onega, Russia (KUSTOVLYANKINA 1990); Kuibyshev Reservoir and other sites in the USSR (MYLNIKOVA
1993, ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992); cooler basin of the Cherepetsk Power Station, USSR (TIMOFEEVA
1989); sometimes very abundant in the plankton of the Volga River and its reservoirs (MAMAEVA l979a,b).
Autecological data: Feeds on pelagic diatoms (Nitzschia pelagica, Stephanodiscus hantzschii, S. quadricauda,
in Lake Baikal almost exclusively on Melosira baikalensis), cyanobacteria (Anabaena spiroides), cryptomonads,
green algae (Chlorella sp.), and sometimes even on smail ciliates (-+ Halteria grandinella, -+ Urotricha farcta)
and organic debris (GAJEWSKAJA 1933, MAMAEVA & KOPYLOV 1978, WILBERT 1972). Biomass of 106
specimens about 190 mg (KRAINER 1988, MAMAEVA & KOPYLOV 1978, FOISSNER et al. 1994),
29*100 mg (mercuric chloride-preserved specimens; SCHWEIZER 1994). GAJEWSKAJA (1933) fo:urrd M. pe-
lagica in Lake Baikal under following conditions: 0-7.4o C, pH7.l-:7.6, ll.5-14.3 mg l-r Oz, 0.44 to 5.3 mg l-'
COz m", 2C-25 mg l-' CaO, 2.1-5.2 mg ll MgO, 0.25-2.3 mg l-1 SiOz, 0.43-3 mg l-r Oz oxydation. WILBERT
(19'72) observed M. pelagica in the Poppelsdorfer Weiher at G-6.5o C, pH 8.1-8.3,9.6-12.5 mg l-r Oz, 5.2-9.2
mg l-r COz, 6.3-8.1 mg l-t NO:--N, 1.8 x 106 to 2.4 x 106 bacteria ml' (direct counts).
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Europe and Asia only. Possibly, less rare than indicated by litera-
ture data. Euplanktonic in lakes, ponds, and reservoirs, especially during the cold seasons, indicating that Mari-
tuja pelagica is a cold-stenothermic species. Omnivorous and oligo-stenohaline. Very likely, M. pelagica does
not form resting cysts (GAJEWSKAJA 1933, WILBERT 1972). Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER
et al. 1994i oligosaprobic (o = 8, b = 2,I = 4, SI = 1.2).
432

Hyrnenostornatta
t6
Peritrichida
t2
Lr
(a
o
o
1.0 Marit.pel. 20
0.8
15
0.6
tr l0
tA
0.4
C())
0.2
t 2 3 4 5 6 0.0 1234 5 6 r2 3 4 5 6
STATION
STATION STATION
1994). | 3 = littoral stations, 4,-$ = pelagial stations. Cell numbers are summarized over the year 1992. Histiob. sp. = Histiobalurttiunt sp.
(possibly -+ H. bodamicum), Marit. pel. = Marituja pelagica.
ffi1i,li
:,:'i
l'+;. ,+. ':d. ,.> ,: _'i. :,.. i.. ;:.::,;. ,.: ::;,
rOa l' ;. '' .- i''. ;, " ;. " :. .'., AM1
AM2
MA §i.i:':.:;. ;,;,,i
AM3
CS .t.,
-.r.If.3.a .a \
CR
.? .2, t?' UM
.3,? .t .? .t l. !'
.a§,
.3 .3 .3 ,3 .1
oOl,.Oa.ot,
!r"oo'o
l'),." ?"t
o!o
?.o"- 'o
t
lit
t) '(
Ventral view, 100 trrm. According to the original description and recent data, the posterior pole area is unciliated i-+ taxonomy). 2: Oral ap-
paratus. The somatic ciliary rows are composed of basal body pairs and an associated parasomal sac. AMI-3 = adoral membranelles, CP =
cytopyge, CR = somatic ciliary rows, CS = cytostome (mouth), E = extrusomes (trichocysts) in comers of silverline system, MA = macronu-
cleus, UM = undulating membrane, VC = vestibular ciliary rows.
433

Hymenostomata
m
ru
SS
l{
7 v#r\r
CR8
..]-a'trsrr- -- -"r'rrt t ttt tr 1ll lrrr ^1rr .rtllt'."
il:lii ill,.,il",.,
;;;:::::ii::l
;;::: ;i:::ll
Hn::::#l;iii ;;i ;; ;' ; ;ii i ' ;i :i :i :i :j ; : ;:
j;l;;; ffi::l;
:::: : : ::: :;:;
:: : i : : ::: a ::; :;:i iiii:::,:i
:::: : ;, :: l; :: ': ;: ;: ;: ,;: .; .: ": ":: :: :; :, ll lli'i,''
,;llI:§;.:.$:iii ...'.*
ii'
li.'':' :' "'' - " :'-'-:.'.:::' i I i 11i:I ; ; Ii,j
TP :l i.'*l: ;ijii;{. \i i:::: - .:: . .:'., ii
-su ..:.i.... . :1..1(..... 1...,.....1. I
9
Marituja pelagica (3,6, fTom GAJEWSKAJA 1933; 4,8-l0, fiom KRAINER 1988; 5, T, fiom PACKROFF & WILBERT
1991.3, 4,6, in vivo; 5, 7,9, 10, protargol impregnation; 8, Klein-Foissner silver nitrate impregnation). 3: Lateral view,
125-140 pm. 4: Oblique frontoventral view, 105 pm. 5: Ciliary pattem of posterior pole region, 85 pm. The semicircular
polar band in the posterior suture is composed of cilia pairs (-+ taxonomy). 6: Specimen deformed by an ingested Melosira
bundle. 7: Resting (left; cp. Fig. 17,18) and exploded (right; up to 60 pm long) extrusome. Bar 10 pm. 8: The silverline sys-
tem is composed of a longitudinal, direct connecting and a meshed, indirect connecting system. 9, 10: Ciliary pattern of dor-
sal and ventral side, 80 pm. CP - cytopyge, CR = somatic ciliary rows, CV = contractile vacuole, DI = ingested diatoms, E =
extrusome fringe (trichocysts), EP = excretory pore of contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuoles, MA = macronucleus, OA =
oral apparatus, SS = silverline system, SU = suture (polar band), VC = vestibular ciliary rows.
434



Hymenostomata
ffi
MA
"'F{ffi ,:,*' #
-
' .:ff: !tI.: ,: .&',ü.
,#i'*j
- ri|' r,# .' f,: ,.; , r{'': ,.':' .i. .i ', :l . . *, 't. :* # 'o ,t, 4,, '
"
tt:{:' : ,,'tt::Ü'
"';'1:::t:ii"i:f!:# j'
_.i:oiim
#,rl;";\
"'|.lirr'ffi 't{.'t ft.:.;::,,*., !r;
ti :1 ä:: t. :,,:4 :11 :# :::::i :t; :i :: 'i+:v ::t. :i:': :i l;, ;n. g:. i.i ;4i.l .f. i". :. . '. .: .:. r:. :'+:ii:t::. .p# ;, :,:t i'
,x., i.+, ,.r :.r :., %#*, , _ !i:: .*:*h 4,; ,: ,ü; ,:' ;:.a '):;!:, ;,:t;I':f,au "i ", .a ,#:? .? fü' ;i$. ",n *,"tw; in ; i *,t:::': .#t :-t ,a::t Y, :t q: :,t l,:: 't;, i? ll:t r:|l,# t ',l ,.; !: ., j '' -, T ' i-: t.',, p,4!&7i .dit .-' : ', . 'M -,\';' , -#1i '- :t .z :;* 11 i} :; , t.t i:: it;::1tt,1, #tfi,:l1it;:;4tt;);;,t:,::".,f; :r" ')
"-., ,
22
25
Marituja pelagica (originals of a population fiom a small take fHöglwörther See] in Bavaria. 20, 2l,23 25, silver carbonate impregnation;
22, protargol impregnation). 20,21r 23-25: Oblique anterior and posterior polar view of same specimen and details (oral apparatus de-
stroyed due to preparation procedure). The meridional ciliary rows are so regularly arranged that distinct rings are formed in the anterior and
middle third ofthe body (2O,21,24). Arrow in (23) marks excretory pore ofcontractile vacuole near end ofsuture, arrows in (25) denote fi-
bres associated with basal bodies. 22: General ventral view. CP = cytopyge, MA = macronucleus, SU = suture.
436

Hymenostomata
H
!,rir
Marituja pelagica (originals of a population fiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria. 26, 27,29, scanning electron micro-
graphs; 28, silver carbonate impregnation). 26, 27, 292 Anterior polar view of a partially deciliated specimen showing details of oral and so-
matic cortex and ciliary pattem. Asterisks mark the long cilia of the adoral membranelles which cover, together with the narrowly spaced
vestibular cilia, the buccal cavity. Note the diverse cortical meshes, which reflect the complicated ciliary pattem (Figure 28). 28: Ciliary pat-
tem of right anterior quadrant. Arrows mark fibres associated with basal bodies. CR = somatic ciliary rows, OA = oral apparatus, UM = un-
dulating membrane on right wall of buccal cavity, VC = vestibular ciliary rows.
437

Hymenostomata
I
1
30
illa
:.,:::..:::r:.:..r. i:::i:.:.:,:...:.:.r.ll:.:.:.:+.:.:.tl:::iltti.:,rrNirr\\\\l:+j::::.:,r.:ri:.
Marituja pelagica (30-33, fiom WILBER-l 1912.30-32, protargol impregnation; 33, Chatton-LwofT silver nitrate impreg-
nation). 30,32:. Marituja pelag,ica has a long, tortuous macronucleus, which separates it from a1l other planktonic hymeno-
stomes, whose macronucleus is ellipsoidal or reniform. 31: Posterior pofiion of oral ciliature, which is composed of three
adoral membranelles (Q, Pl, P2) and many vestibular ciliary rows (V; cp. Figure 2).33: Anterior polar view showing oral
aperture and circular arangement of somatic ciliary rows. Explanation of original labelling: Ma = macronucleus, PK = undu-
lating membrane,Pl,P2 = adoral membranelles, Q = adoral membranelle 3 (quadrulus), S = meridional somatic ciliary rows
forming circles, V = vestibular ciliary rows.
438

Hymenostomata
Stokesia vernalis wENRICH, re2e
1929 Stokesiavernalis WENRICH, Trans. Am. microsc. Soc.,48:229.
l93l Stokesia (Cyclotrichium) vernalis (WANG, 1928) WENRICH, 1929 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 21: 311 (first
reviser).
1935 Stokesia vernalis (WANG) - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 833 (redescription from life).
196l Stokesia vernalis WENRICH, 1929 - ROQUE, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg., 95: 468 (redescription after silver im-
pregnation; morphogenesis).
1966 Stokesia vernalis WANG - DRAGESCO, Protistologica,2:78 (redescription from life and after silver im-
pregnation).
1991 Stokesia vernalis WENRICH, 1929 - PACKROFF & WILBERT, Arch. Protistenk., 140: 129 (redescrip-
tion from life and after silver impregnation).
1994 Stokesia vernalis WENRICH, 1929 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte des
Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, U94: 2OO ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecological
monograph).
1995 Stokesia vernalis WENRICH 1929 - KRAINER, Lauterbomia,2l: 5O (redescription from life and after
silver impregnation).
Nomenclature
This species was mentioned (as Cyclotrichium vernalis WENRICH) for the first time by WANG (1928) in a spe-
cies list from the type location. Thus, KAHL (1931) and DRAGESCO (1966) assigned it to WANG. However,
according to the ICZN (1985), WANG's name is a nomen nudum (FOISSNER 1987b).
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo IOO-220 pm across, usually about 150 pm.
2) Body oblique cone-shaped (limpet-like or cap-shaped) with all angles rounded off, that is, ventral outline
obovoidtocordiform,lateraltriangular(Fig. l-3,5-9,18,23,3941,43,44,46).
3) Macronucleus usually in right body-half, ellipsoidal. 1-4 micronuclei (Fig. 2, 6-8,20).
4) Contractile vacuole and its conspicuous pores dorsal, right of midline, with radial collecting canals (Fig. 2, 6,
22.26,40,45).
5) Cells green due to symbiotic algae 4-6 pm across in vivo; number of algae often low, specimens then colour-
less (Fig. 2, 1 ,8,47). Note that conjugating individuals are smaller and most lack zooctrlorellae (WENRICH
1929). Extrusomes (trichocysts) about 8 pm long, fusiform, numerous and thus producing conspicuous fringe
(Fig.2, 5,8,9,20,24-21); attached to corners of cortical ridges (Fig. 17 , 48, 49).
6) About 250 basal body rows, which abut to a distinct, almost circular suture in midline and are ciliated only
ventrally and laterally; dorsal side thus bare, except for the quture (Fig. 2,3, 6, 16,28-32,3946). Cortex rec-
tangularly patterned with cilia emerging from centre of meshes (Fig. 17, 48,49).
7) Oral apparatus in median depression of flat ventral side, rather large. At left wall of buccal cavity two adoral
membranelles (peniculi I and 2) each composed of three narrowly spaced ciliary rows, third membranelle
(peniculus 3) on cavity bottom and composed of five to six widely spaced ciliary rows; at right side of oral
opening an inconspicuous undulating membrane and some vestibular rows, each composed of narrowly
spaced cilia pairs (Fig. l*5, 12-15, 19, 21, 28, 32-391' details of oral ciliature only recognizable after silver
impregnation, not necessa.ry for identification).
8) Moderalely fast swimming.
439

Hymenostomata
Similar species
Stokesia WENRICH, 1929 is monotypical, that is, includes only S. vernalis. KAHL (1935) supposed synonymy
with -+ Disematostoma tetraedricum, which is, however, a distinct species (see following description). In vivo
rather easily confused with two other euplanktonic hymenostomes, namely, -+ Disematostoma tetraedricum
(100-140 x 50-60 pm, tetrahedral, macronucleus reniform) and --> Marituja pelagica (without symbiotic algae,
truncated cone-shaped, macronucleus filiform and almost circular). l, 2, 3, 5 (usually with symbiotic green
algae) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic and common in lakes, ponds, and reservoirs, but also in large rivers
and slowly running streams. Throughout the year (e.g., LAYBOURN-PARRY et al. 1994, SCHLOTT-IDL
1984a), often, however, peaking in spring (e.g., BERECZKY 1979a, WENRICH 1929).
The locus classicus is in Philadelphia, USA, where WENRICH (1929) discovered Stokesia vernalis in a small
pond at the University of Pennsylvania with high abundance (up to 3000 ind. l') during Mid-May. WANG
(1928), who recorded it from the same pond (-+ nomenclature), counted l0 700 ind. I' during spring. Further-
more, WENRICH (1929) found it in the October plankton of a pond in San Francisco. Further records substanti-
ated by illustrations and/or micrographs: throughout the year in an oligotrophic and a eu- to polytrophic lake of
Germany (PACKROFF I99Z,PACKROFF & WILBERT l99l); sometimes abundant in the Alster River and in
ponds of Hamburg, Germany (KAHL 1935); surface plankton of a pond (Mühlweiher) near the village of Dettin-
gen, Germany, on October 10,1991 (M. KREUTZ,Fig.18); Lake Geneva in September (DRAGESCO 1966);
I
oligotrophic lake (Marktlsee; PO+-P <0.005 mg I throughout the year) in Bavaria (S. TRAUTWEIN, Fig. 23);
lakes near Paris, France in January and spring (ROQUE 1961); Polish lakes with low dystrophy (CZAPIK &
FYDA 1995); Moldavian water bodies (CHORIK 1968); Central Baikal Area, USSR (LOKOT 1987); Tibet
(SHEN 1983). We found Srolcesia vernalis in the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria (Fig. 19-22,
2449), and in a eutrophic fishpond (Salzachsee) in Salzburg during a Scenedesmus bloom and high rotifer abun-
dance during late May. Both populations contained only few symbiotic green algae.
RUTTNER (1937; without illustration) observed Stokesia vernalis in several oligotrophic alpine lakes of Austria
with up to 1900 ind. l-r and at about 6J Vo Oz-sattration in 35 m. From five observations, he obtained the follow-
ing range of occurrence:1.5-60 m (14-35 m on average), 4.5-10" C (5*:7" C on average); however, he could not
find a preference of the maxima below 10 m. RUTTNER (1937) thus concluded that Stokesia vernalis is an
oligothermic species, which colonizes the hypolimnion during summer, and with temperature as key faclor for
the maxima. However, according to BERECZKY & NOSEK (1993) and BELOVA (1989), Stokesia vernalis
prefers temperatures between 15 and 20o C. Very likely, temperature is not a decisive factor tor S. vernalis (-->
Table). SCHLOTT-IDL (1984a; without illustration) observed Stokesia vernalis throughout the year in an oligo-
trophic, alpine lake (Lunzer Untersee) of Austria (-+ Ecograms a-c). Peaks (up to 1020 ind. l-r and 61 mg m-3 in
25 m) occurred in deep strata and always during May when the lake lost the ice-cover. The average values were
between 31 ind. I I (1.3 mgm-3) in July and334 ind. lr (20mgm-3) in Mid-May. The whole water column was
colonized from fhe autumn mixis to the time the lake become again ice-covered. KRAINER (1988, 1995) re-
corded Stokesia vernalis in two nutrient-poor, Austrian ground water ponds from July to late October with a peak
of 464 ind. I I (116 mg m 3) in 3 m during July.
Records from lake and pond plankton not substantiated by illustrations: mesotrophic lake (Mondsee) in Austria
(SALBRECHTER & ARNDT 1994); in 0-4 m with up to 102 ind.l-r in a eutrophic lake (Plußsee) of Germany,
only during spring (RECK 1981, -+ Table); moderately eutrophic lake (Schösee) in northem Germany (WICK-
r)
HAM 1995b); Loch Ness, a large oligotrophic lake in Scotland, peaking (100 ind. I during autumn
(LAYBOURN-PARRY et al. 1994); common in Lake Windermere, England (LAYBOURN-PARRY & ROGER-
SON 1993); up to 500-2000 ind. l-r in the epilimnion (0.5-1.0 m) of Priest Pot, a eutrophic pond in England, dur-
ing July, August, and September, but absent in November and February @ERNINGER et al. 1986, 1993, FIN-
LAY et al. 1988, GOULDER 1912,1915, -) Ecogram d); sporadically in Esthwaite, a eutrophic lake in England
440

Hymenostomata
300
100
JJASOND
100 200 100 200
Depth 09 .00 r 4 . 00 19 .00 24 .00 05.00 10.00 d rd 2o'c
(m) hours hours hours hours hours hours
1.0 I5D
l.l
7b
1.2 ,b ; ; ; ; ;,
1.3 ,b
t.4 3b lb o 5b 0 ,D TOTAL
t.5 0 2b 0 0 0 3D
1.6 lb 0 0 0 lb 2b
t.7 2b 0 o 0 ,b 0 e l-i
I.8 Ib o 0 0 lb lb
t.9 0 0 o 0 lD -,b c) TEMPERATURE
2-O 0 0 0 0 0 3b H
2-l 0 0 o lr 0 4b .Crl) 100
2-2 0 o 0 0 0 3,b F{
2.3 o l1 0 0 0
2.4 0 2t 0 0 0 ve rno I is
lr
2-5 o 0 0 0
2-6 0 0 0 0 lr
2-7 0 0 0 0 0
2.8 o lr 0 0 lr
l.
2.9 0 0 0 0
3.0 o o 0 0 0
3.1 o 0 0 0 lr
lo0
3.2 0 0 0 0 00d 0 200 0 1OO 2O0e
3.3 0 0 0 0
Ec<rgrams of Stokasia vernalis (a-c, fiom SCHLOTT-IDL 1984a; d, from GOULDER 1972; e, from TAYLOR & HEYNEN 1987). a: Aver-
age abundances (white bars, ind. tr; left scale) and biomasses (black bars, img m3; right scale) in the Lunzer Untersee, a small alpine lake in
Austria.b,c:Verticaldistribution(ind. lr)intheLunzerUnterseeonJuly 12,1933(b)andJuly27,I98l(c).d:Verticaldistribution(figures
are ciliates per 5 ml) of Stokesia vernalis (superscript b) and -+ Frontonia /eacas (superscript a) in Priest Pot, a eutrophic pond in England,
on 12-13 August 1971. The solid line marks the upper limit ofthe dense population of Loxodes magnus, a microaerobic ciliate. e: Vertical
distribution of biomass (wet mass in prg I r) of all ciliates (left graph) and of S. vernalis (right graph) in Lake Ontario near midlake (depth =
178 m) on June 28,1982.
(LAYBOURN-PARRY et al. 1990); oligo- to mesotrophic and eutrophic lakes in France (AMBLARD et al.
1993, 1994, size of fixed specimens 48 pm, indicating misidentification; SIME-NGANDO & HARTMANN
l99l); Azerbaijanian reservoirs (ALEKPEROY 1982,1988, 1990); oligotrophic and mesotrophic Latvian lakes
during summer (LIYEPA 1984b); Ladoga Lake, Russia (SMIRNOVA 1987); together with Metopus es in the
Kiev Reservoir, Ukraine, at about 14o C during May (KOVAL'CHUK 1982); Ukrainian reservoirs and ponds
(KOVALCHUK & SVINTSOVA 1994, NEBRAT 1980, OLEKSIV 1985, OLEKSIV et al. 1986);meso- and eu-
trophic lakes in Russia (KORNIYENKO 1972); in two Russian karst lakes with an average of 73 ind. l-' and
101 ind. l-r from May to October, peaking in both lakes during September with 155 ind. l-', respectively,
341 ind.lr GETROVA et al. 1976); Rybinskoe Reservoir, Russia (MAMAEVA 1973, MYLNIKOVA 1992a);
USSR, mainly in slightly saprobic reservoirs (MAMAEVA 1914b, 1916a, MYLNIKOVA 1992b, 1993, NE-
BRAT 1991, ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992; ZHARIKOY 1992, benthic record); Lake Donghu, China (GONG
1986); Bowland Lake, Canada (KELLER et al. 1992); small Canadian pond during Mid-October (TAYLOR &
BERGER 1980); eutrophic, monomictic Lake Oglethorpe in Georgia, USA, from June to September (PACE
1982, SANDERS et al. 1989); at a single station of the Conestoga drainage basin, Pennsylvania, USA (CAIRNS
1965);200 ind. l' (0.4 g m-2 wet weight) in the epilimnion of Lake Ontario, Canada, peaking during July (TAY-
LOR 1984, TAYLOR & HEYNEN 1987, -+ Ecogram e; bright green due to zoochlorellae); both in surface and
44t

Hymenostomata
deep samples from Lake Huron and Lake Michigan, USA (CARRICK & FAHNENSTIEL 1990); Big Bay, Lake
Michigan, USA (WEST 1953, WEST & LUNDIN 1963); Cayuga Lake, New York, USA, with 145 ind. l-r in the
epilimnion during late June and 1 ind. l-t in92 m (HUNT & CHEIN 1983). Stokesia vernalis sensu PETROVA
& SMIRNOVA(1914) from a secondarily oligotrophic lake in the USSR was only 4l-58x 58-82pm in size,
indicating misidentification; the autecological data are thus omitted.
Records from large or very slowly running waters: with low abundance in mesosaprobic lowland rivers of Ger-
many (HEUSS 1976, HEUSS et al. 1912); cooling system of power stations, one supplied by the betamesosapro-
bic Main River, Germany (BERNERTH 1982, CHORIK & VIKOL 1973, TIMOFEEVA 1989); Danube River
and side branches (16 Vo dominance during late September) in Austria, Slovakia, and Hungary (BERECZKY
1977, 1977a, 1991, BERECZKY & NOSEK 1993, 1994, HUMPESCH & MOOG 1994, NOSEK & BEREC-
ZKY 198I,1994, TIRJAKOVÄ 1992); Elbe Esruary, Germany (RIEDEL-LORJE 19Sl); Lielupe, a Latvian
river (LIEPA 1973); l0 ind. 1-r (spring),24 ind.l-r (summer), 7 ind. 1 I (autumn) in the betamesosaprobic Volga
River, Russia (MAMAEVA 1914,1919b, MAMAYEVA 1975); Pripyat River, Ukraine (NEBRAT 1992): in a
turbid Putah Creek Lake, a small tributary to the Sacramento River, Califomia, USA (KENT 1985); Cape Fear
River, North Carolina, USA (CAIRNS & YONGUE 1973; -+ Table).
PETKOVIÖ & PETKOVI Ö ll}lZl found Stoftes ia vernalis in the small and brackish Sasko Lake in Yugoslavia.
Autecological data: Mixotrophic, that is, autotrophic due to the symbiotic green algae (often low in numbers)
and omnivorous feeding on a wide range of items, such as bacteria, pelagic algae 3-30 pm across (e.g., diatoms.
Pandorina), autotrophic flagellates (e.g., Cryptomonas, dinoflagellates), änd organic debris (BERECZKY 1977b,
BICK 1912A. FINLAY Et AI. 1988, KRAINER 1988, MAMEYEVA & KOPYLOV 1978, SANDERS Et AI. 1989,
SIME-NGANDO & HARTMANN 1991, TAYLOR 1984, WICKHAM 1995b). Ingestion rate 161-598'bacteria
ind.-rh-r, clearance rate 11.3-8'7.3nlind.rhr (SANDERS et al. 1989). According ro TAYLOR & HEYNEN
(1987), Stokesia yernalis consumes algae too large for most cladoceran grazers. TAYLOR (1984) observed a
flux of phosphorus into Stokesia vernalis of 2.31 pl h r. Further autecological data --> Table.
Table: Autecological data of Stokesia vernalis. Column l, from CAIRNS & YONGUE (1973; river in North Carolina, USA); column 2,
from BERECZKY (1911b: betamesosaprobic Danube River in Hungary); columns 3,4,from RECK (1987; column 3, total range from a
eutrophic lake in Germany; column 4, analysis at maximum abundance of 102 ind. I'r); column 5, from ZIMMERMANN ( 1989; mesotrophic
lake in Tyrol, Austria).
Parameters References
1 2 Ja 4. 5
Temperature (' C) 24.5-26.0 1 -t5 4.5-9.0 8.8 4-20
pH 6.1-1 .3 1.6-7.8 I .g-5.92 8.9 6.9 -8.9
o, (mg I') 6.6-8.1 t .9-10. 6.t-t4.0 t2.l 0.4-8.9
1
Oz (saturation 7o) 4t-t22 109
l')
BoDs (mg 1.4-2.4 3.7 -5.21
l')
NH+*-N (mg 0.005-0.t2 0-0.8 0.038-0.07 0.042 0-0.21
l')
NO: -N (mg 0.31-0.65 0.47-0.70
NOz -N (mg 1') 0.018-0.053
' "O.-consumption". 2 The second value should probably run 8.9.
Miscellaneous autecological data:3.3-6.0mglrSiOz,0.36-0.14mglrFe2*,0.05-0.08 mgl-r Mn,7-18 mgll
SO+'z,5.6-8.0 mgl-r C*-'1.1-2.7 mglr Mg2*'15.0-17.5 mgl-'C1-,0.09-0.14 mgl-r PO+3--P (CAIRNS &
YONGUE 1973);04.6 mg l-r COz t*" (BERECZKY 1917b); at ll.1-16.2 mg l-r Oz in Moldavian waters (CHO-
RrK 1968).
442

Hymenostomata
Biomass of 106 specimens: 2300 mg (SIME-NGANDO & HARTMANN 1991), 1844 rug(NESTERENKO &
KOVALCHUK 1991), 560-1827 mg at a size range of 19-189 pm (PETROVA et al. 1916), about 250mg
(KRAINER 1988), about 400 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1994). Due to the large size range, biomass should be calcu-
lated for each population. The following values are conspicuously low, indicating misidentification: 50-102 mg
for 47-58 x 58-82 pm sized cells (PETROVA & SMIRNOVA 1914),85 mg (OLEKSIV 1985), aboü 4'7 mg for
preserved, 43 x 46 pm-sized specimens (PACE 1982).
Stokesiavernalis is able to form resting cysts 90*1 l0pm across (Fig. 10). In contrast to those of -+ Disema-
tostoma and -+ Frontonia, they lack an emergence pore (Fig. 17 by -+ Disematostoma buetschlii). MAMAEVA
(1979) discovered a specific parasite, the suctor Sphaerophrya stokesii (Fig. 3.7 on p. 35).
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Eurasia only. Euplanktonic in stagnant and slowly running waters.
Common throughout the year, however, often more abundant in spring. In eutrophic lakes usually confined to the
epilimnion, in oligotrophic lakes also hypolimnetic. Eurythermic and oligo-stenohaline. Mixotrophic and omni-
vorous; thus, Stokesia vernalis is able to sustain periods of low food supply. Resting cyst formation known.
Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et al. (1994): betamesosaprobic (o = 3, b = 7,I= 4, SI = 1.7).
I
E
SA
CV
MI
FV
CS
OA
4
SA
/ ('\-,, E
SA
CV-OA\ OA
FV
MA
CV
Stokesiavernalis invivo(l,4,5,fiomKAHL 1935;2,3,fromWENRICH 1929:,6, original; T,fiomDRAGESCO 1966; 8,
from PACKROFF & WILBERT l99l). 1: Cross section in oral region. 2,3: Right lateral views (110 pm) showing main cell
organelles and ciliature. Note flat, ciliated ventral and vaulted, bare (except suture) dorsal side. 4: Oral apparatus. Arrow
marks adoral membranelle 3, which is composed of five to six widely spaced ciliary rows. 5, 7, 8: Ventral views, 150 prm,
180 prm, 110 pm. Note that DRAGESCO and PACKROFF & WILBERT illustrate the contractile vacuole in wrong position
(see Fig. 6). 6: Diagram (from live and SEM observations) showing location ofcontractile vacuole, macronucleus, oral appa-
ratus, and preoral and postoral suture. C = cilia of preoral suture, CP = "cell anus" (possibly the excretory pores, which are
very conspicuous in S. vernalis), CS = cytostome, CV = contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes, FV = food vacuole, MA =
macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, OA = oral apparatus, SA = symbiotic green algae, §fl = preoral and postoral suture.
443

Hymenostomata
..r A AM1
»-1
AM2
MA
CS
10 AM3
UM
AM3 AM1
.:
AM2
13
_SU
AM1 -CR
A I\13
AM2
AM1
-SS
Stokesiavernalis(9, 11, 12, 14,äomKRAINER 1988, 1995; l0,fromWENRICH 1929;13,fiomDRAGESCO 1966;15,
from PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991; 16, 17, from ROQUE 1961.9, 10, in vivo; ll, 12, 14, protargol impregnation; 13,
l5-lT,Chatton-Lwoff silvernitrateimpregnation).9:Lateralview, l35pm.Thisillustrationisincorrectbecausethedorsal
side is unciliated (Fig. 2,3, 40). 10: Resting cyst (90-l l0 pm) with fragmented macronucleus and symbiotic green algae.
11: Ciliary pattern of ventral side, 120 pm. 12: Transverse view of oral apparatus. 13-15: Oral apparatus. Note conspicuous
adoral membranelle 3, an important difference to -+ Disematostoma. The arrangement of the somatic ciliary rows around the
oral apparatus is not entirely correct in any of the illustrations. 16: Basal body pattem on dorsal side (cp. Figures 40,46).
17: Silverline system. Arrow marks a basal body pair with the associated parasomal sac. AMl-3 = adoral membranelles
(peniculi), CR = somatic ciliary rows (unciliated on dorsal side!), CS = cytostome, CV = contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes
(trichocysts), EP = excretory pores (usually 3-5) of contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuole with ingested Pandorina colony,
MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, N = nematodesmata (oral basket rods), OA = oral apparatus, SA = symbiotic green
algae, SS = silverline system, §fI = preoral and postoral suture, UM = undulating membrane, VC = vestibular ciliary rows.
444

Hymenostomata
2:
Stokesia vernalis ( I 8, kindly supplied by M. KREUTZ: 19-22, 24-27 , otiginals of a population fiom the pond at Salzburg University; 23,
kindly supplied by S. TRAUTWEIN. 18-23, 25,26, in vivo interference contrast and bright field micrographs; 24, silver carbonate impreg-
nation;27, methyl green-pyronin stain). 18,23: Freely motile specimens in dorsal and lateral view, showing the highly characteristic outline.
19-22,25,26: Slightly squeezed specimens showing the extrusome fringe, the oral apparatus, ingested Dinobryon colonies (arrows in 20),
the contractile vacuole with collecting canals, and the macronucleus.24,27: Ejected unexploded (24) and exploded (27) trichocysts with
conical distal end. CV = contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes, FV = food vacuoles, MA = macronucleus, OA = oral apparatus.
445

Hymenostomata
S.U
28
Stokesia vernalis afier silver carbonate impregnation (originals of a population liom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University). 28, 30: Cili-
ary pattem ofventral and dorsal side showing oral apparatus and prominent preoral suture extending over dorsal side (suture end marked by
iurow, cp. Figures 6, 40, 46). The specimen was heavily squashed for photography and the oral structures are thus slightly distorted. 29, 31:
Ciliary rows and infraciliary lattice (a system of fibres maintaining cell shape) at dorsal end of preoral suture (arrows). AM1-3 = adoral
membranelles (peniculi), §[J = preoral suture, UM = undulating membrane.
416

Hymenostomata
U
it*
32
Stokesia vernalis, oral and somatic ciliary pattern after silver carbonate impregnation (originals of a population fiom the eutrophic pond at
Salzburg University, Austria). 32: Ventral view showing oral apparatus, preoral suture, and somatic ciliary rows. 33,36-38: Adoral mem-
branelles. Membranelles 1 and2 are each composed of three narrowly spaced ciliary rows, while membranelle 3, which consists of five or
six (arrows in 38) widely spaced ciliary rows, is very prominent. 34, 35: The ciliature at the right margin of the buccal cavity is mainly com-
posed of basal body pairs. AM1-3 = adoral membranelles (peniculi), CR = somatic ciliary rows, F = fibre, §IJ = preoral suture, UM = undu-
lating membrane, VC = vestibular ciliary rows.
441

Hymenostomata
Stokesia vernalis (original scanning electron micrographs of a population fiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University). 39: Ciliated ven-
tral side with large, depressed oral apparatus (cilia partially detached due to the preparation procedures). Arrow marks postoral suture. 40, 41,
43: Oblique posterior polar view, right lateral view, and oblique anterior polar view showing the highly characteristic body shape, the uncili-
ated dorsal side, and the pores ofthe contractile vacuole. 42: The serrated dorsal suture bears long, widely spaced cilia (Fig. 3,40). EP = ex-
cretory pores ( 4 pm across in life), OA = oral apparatus, SU = suture.
448

Hymenostomata
::::::::::r:: :: :i1::,:::::': ::| ::::t:r] ::: r:: :i :i| ::| ::j l:: ,:] l:: ti::::i:i:l:::
i i
l, fii ii *i:, t: :tl :ii ::: ,:i .:t ,,l :i: :: :: :: :::
ffi" ',." : i: iii....i
{ffi
....,,,.i,*
47
1$1i
Stokesiavernalis (originals of a population fiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University. 4446,48,49, scanning electron micrographs;
47, silver carbonate impregnation). 44: Oblique (right lateral) anterior polar view showing preoral suture and excretory pores on the uncili-
ated dorsal half. 45: Dorsal suture ard excretory pores. 46: Posterior polar view showing the distal end ofthe preoral suture (arrowhead) and
the short postoral suture (arrow). Both sutures commence at the oral apparatus (Fig. 6, 32) and encircle the cell in midline. 47: Symbiotic
green algae (arrows). 48, 49: Partially demembranated specimen showing the rectangular cortical meshes, in the comers of which the extru-
somes (trichocysts) are attached. EP = excretory pores of contractile vacuole, OA = oral apparatus, SU = suture.
449

4.4.3 Peritrichia srprN, tsss
The peritrichs have six main features: (i) The body is unciliated and inverted campanulate, goblet-shaped, or cy-
lindrical (Fig. 2). Only some stalkless species, the mobiline peritrichs (e.9. -+ Opisthonecta), and all swarmers
have an aboral ciliary wreath (trochal band; Fig. 1a); (ii) The adoral ciliary spiral and the undulating membrane
encircle, counterclockwise, the anterior end (peristomial disc and collar) and then plunge deep into the vestibu-
lum, at the bottom of which is the cytostome. The proximal portion of the adoral ciliary spiral is peniculus (ado-
rale membranelle) 1, which is accompanied by two further peniculi (Fig. 2b); (iii) Usually, a conspiiuous stalk
arises from the posterior end of the cell, where a special stalk-forming organelle (scopula) is present. The stalk is
short or long, thin or thick, contractile or aconffactile, branched or unbranched (Fig. 5); (iv) The contractile vacu-
ole empties into the vestibulum (Fig.2a); (v) All peritrichs produce swarmers (migratory telotroch stage, Fig. l)
for distribution, conjugation (sexual reproduction), or to escape from unfavourable conditions; (vi) The division
plane is parallel to the main (longitudinal) body axis, and stomatogenesis is buccokinetal, that is, parental basal
bodies (germinal kinety) are involved in the formation of the new adoral ciliary spiral.
The Peritrichia probably comprise more than 1000 species. The last revisions were performed by KAHL (1935)
and STILLER (1971; in Hungarian). The features needed for identification are shown in Figures 2-5. Genus
identification is rather simple and usually follows stalk features. Conversely, species identification is often diffi-
cult, especially in large genera like -+ Epistylis and + Vorticella, because many descriptions are superficial and
some characters are recognizable only after silver impregnation. Thus, FOISSNER et al. (1992c) lumped very
similar Vorticella species to "complexes" (-> Y. aquadulcis complex).
Peritrichs occur in many limnetic and marine habitats, but are rare in soil. Frequently, they form whitish lawns rec-
ognizable to the naked eye on stones, macrophytes, planctonic cyanobacteria, algae, and animals, especially in pol-
luted, bacteria-rich sites. Three modes of life are found: (i) Many species are sessile, having a low substrate speci-
ficity (e.g. Vorticella convallaria, Carchesium polypinum); (ii) Some species are euplanktonic, usually showing
specific adaptations, such as spines (e.g. -+ Hastatella radians) and fragmenting stalks (e.g. -+ Epistylis procum-
bens); (äi) Many species are symphorionts (epizoans) on benthic and planktonic metazoans, such as rotifers, crus-
taceans, insect larvae, and beetles (e.g. -+ Epßtylß pygmaeum). The peritrichs include rather many host-specific
species, some of which are harmful fish parasites when abundant (e.g. -+ Trichodina pediculus). Most species are,
however, harmless and feed mainly on bacteria, planktonic species often also on small algae, which are filtered
very effectively with the complicated oral ciliature (FENCHEL 1980, Fig. 2b). Thus, peritrichs are important graz-
ers in running and stagnant waters, as well as in sewage treatment plants. Many can form resting cysts.
H
1:i,li\
A,V=\ Dlti
a'- -2 -. . ... .' .. . I,
§'---:.r/
"M
Fig. l. Swalrners in vivo (a, d, e, tiom FOISSNER 1919b;b, f, fiom LUST 1950; c, tiorn NENNINGER 1948; g, after WESENBERG-
LUND 1925). ar Pseudovorticella monilata. b: Operculariella parasitica. ci Epistylis bimarginata. d: --> Vorticella aquadulcis complex
(cell immediately after fission). el + Ophrydiumversatile.f: Opercularia articulata. g: Macrozooid of Zoothamnium arbuscula. AW = abo-
ral ciliary wreath, CV = contractile vacuole, EM = epistomial membrane, MA = macronucleus, SA = symbiotic algae.
450

Peritrichia
DORSAL
c VEST IBULUM
VENTRAL
UM
\e PC
MI
CV1
S
MA FV
@
1\
!'t
't.-,l .
r.
@t
d Y
:---AW
Pt3
Pt2 CS
S
ST
2a
Fig. 2. Organization of a sessile peritlichous ciliate (a, modified fiom FOISSNER 1979b; b, fiom LOM 1964). a: Extended
cell in vivo. b: Oral ciliature after protargol impregnation; only basal bodies shown. c: Schematic anterior polar view. AC =
adoral ciliary spiral (= polykinety; adoral membranelles, number of tums on peristomial disc is sometimes important for
identification, e.g. --> Ophrydium), ttW = anlage of aboral (posterior) ciliary wreath (ciliated only in swarmers and some
stalkless, free-swimming species, e.g. --> Opisthonecta. -+ Aitylozoon and -s Hastatella, although free-swimming too, never
form such a wreath, but move using the adoral cilia), CS = cytostome (mouth; where the oral ciliature terminates), CVl,
CY2 = the contractile vacuole is located, depending on species, either at the ventral (CVl) or dorsal (CV2) wall of the vesti-
bulum (for definition of ventral and dorsal, see Fig. 2c), CY = cytopharynx (non-ciliated tubular passeway, leading from the
cytostome proper into the inner cytoplasm of the cell; typically it forms the food vacuoles), EM = epistomial membrane (a
short, unciliated basal body row of unknown function near entrance of vestibulum; in swarmers and stalkless species, e.g. -+
Opisthonecta, these basal bodies bear long cilia), FV = food vacuole, § = germinal kinety (the new oral ciliature originates
from this unciliated basal body row), MA = macronucleus (important character; types -+ Fig. a), MI = micronucleus (usu-
ally unimportant for identification), MY = myonemes (contractile fibres; difficult to discem in live specimens, except for
stalk myoneme; shows various specializations in certain genera and species), PC = peristomial collar (inconspicuously to
pI)
distinctly projecting from body proper), = peristomial disc (retracted into cell in contracted specimens), PE1-PE3 =
peniculi 1-3 (= a4o.u1 membranelles; membranelle I is the proximal end of the adoral ciliary spiral; length, arrangement,
and structure of the membranelles are usually only family-specific and well recognizable only after silver impregnation), S =
scopula (stalk-forming and attachment site), SS = pellicular striation (types, --> Fig. 3; forms silverline system after silver ni-
trate impregnation), ST = stalk with stalk myoneme (types, -+ Fig. 5), UM = undulating membrane (= haplokinety; the distal
portion runs parallel to the adoral ciliary spiral), Y = vestibulum (infundibulum, buccal cavity; vestibulum, peristomial disc,
peristomial collar, and oral ciliature form the oral apparatus), X = argyrophilic structure of unknown function.
45t

Peritrichia
J--
t'lr\---.--.-.-
F-- m"
l--
(----
( [-__,
f.-
t---
t.'-.-.-
'r'-.----
*
f-...- ».--___
!r-----
t,r----.---
'L.------
J---
3a b d e g
-
et
$
H
i=,
5a
Fig. 3. Pellicula types (a-d.) recognizable with the light microscope, and silverline patterns (e-g) atier silver nitrate impregnation (tiom
FOISSNER et al. 1992c). Narrowly and widely striated silverline systerns can be distinguished (FOISSNER & SCHIFFMANN 1974): divide
the total length (from anterior to posterior end) of live specimens by the total number of silverlines (from anterior to posterior end); if the dis-
tance between silverlines is >1 pm it is the "widely striated type" (a, e), if it is <l pm it is the "narrowly striated type" (b,0. a, e: Concave
pellicle type with furrowed cortex and transversely striated silverline system having pellicular pores (dots); very common, e.g. inVorticella.
b, f: Convex pellicle type with annulated coftex and transversely striated silverline system having pellicular pores (dots): rare, e.g. in
Epistylis plicatilis. c, d, g: Tubercular pellicle type (c) and fringe type (d) with hemispherical, respectively, cube-like blisters and reticulate
silverline system. The tubercle type occurs in --s Pseudohaplocaulus infravacuolatus and most Pseudovorticella species, the fringe type oc-
curs in, for example, Pseudovorticella chlamydophora.
Fig.4. Macronucleus shapes (from FOISSNER et al. 1992c). a: J-shaped (e.g. -> Pseudohoptoroutus infravacuolarus). b, c: C-shaped in
longitudinal axis of cell (e.g. -; Epistylis anastatica). d: Horseshoe-shaped or semicircular in transverse axis of cell (e.g. -+ Vorticella aq-
uadulcis complex). e: Rod-shaped in longitudinal axis of cell (e.g. Rhabdostyla inclinans). f: Filiform (e.9. -+ Ophrydiaz). g: Reniform or
bean-shaped (e.9. --> Astylozoon faurei). h: Ellipsoidal (e.9. Scyphidia rugosa, Orbopercularia species).
Fig. 5. Stalk shapes (from FOISSNER et aL. 1992c). Only stalks containing a myoneme are contractile (a-c). a: Unbranched, with myoneme,
contractshelically(e.g.-+Vorticellaspp.);shouldnotbeconfusedwiththezrgzagcontractingstalksof Haplocaulusand -sPseudohaplo-
caulus. b: Branched, stalk myonemes of individual zooids connected at ramification sites, contracts in zigzag (e.g. Zoothamnium). c:
Branched, stalk myonemes of individual zooids not connected at ramification sites, confiacts helically (e.9. -s Epicarchesium). d: Branched,
hollow, without myoneme, often distinctly striated longitudinally (e.g. Campanella umbellaria). e: Branched, compact (not hollow), without
myoneme, distinctly sffiated longitudinally (e.g. --> Epistylis spp.). f: Branched, compact (not hollow), partially or completely annulated, of-
ten distinctly striated longitudinally (e.g. -+ Epistylis digitalis). g: Branched, compact, not distinctly structured (e.9. --> Ophrydium spp.).
452

Peritrichia
Astylozoon fallax ENGELMANN, 1862
1862 Astylozoonfallax ENGELMANN, Z. wiss. Zool.,71: 389.
1935 Astylozoonfallax ENGELMANN, 1862 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 665 (revision).
1962 Astylozoon fallax ENGELMANN 1862 - DINGFELDER, Arch. Protistenk., 105: 624 (pro parte: Abb.
7lc, d; nec: Abb. 7la,b, e-h; illustrated record).
r
l97l Astylozoon fallax ENGELMANN - STILLER, Fauna Hung., 105: 7 (pro parte: Abb. 21^, E; nec: Abb.
2B-D; revision; illustrated record).
1977 Astylozoonfallax(ENGELMANN, 1862)-FOISSNER,Protistologica,13:358(revision).
1992 Astylozoon fallax ENGELMANN, 1862 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte
des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192: 289 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecologi-
cal monograph).
Taxonomy
This species was queried several times because of its reniform macronucleus. ENRIQUES (1912) and DING-
FELDER (1962) considered it as a variety of A. pyrforrne SCHEWIAKOFF, 1892. However, JAROCKI &
JAKUBOWSKA (1927; without illustration) and STILLER (1971) confirmed the observations by ENGEL-
MANN (1862). Furthermore, -s A. faurei also has a reniform nucleus (Fig. 28 by -+ A. faurei complex). De-
tailed redescription necessary.
Differential diagnosis
1) Extended cells in vivo up to 100 pm long (ENGELMANN 1862), 41-67 pm according to DINGFELDER
(1962); length 1.8-2.3 times width (Fig. 1-3).
2) Extended cells turnip-shaped to ellipsoidal, rarely cylindrical, posterior portion usually tapered and curved
dorsally (Fig. 1-a). Cells contractile.
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, reniform (Fig. l-a).
4) Contractile vacuole slightly undemeath peristomial collar at ventral wall of vestibulum (Fig. 1-4).
s) Pellicle distinctly striated transversely (Fig. 1-3).
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar often inconspicuous, that is, hardly projecting
from body proper. Peristomial disc flat to distinctly convex and slightly raised in feeding specimens. Vestibu-
lum about 1/3 of body length (Fig. 1-4).
7) Stalkless; scopula, however, present, bearing one or several inconspicuous bristles (Fig. 1-a).
8) Solitary, swims with anterior end (oral apparatus) directed forward.
Similar species
Easily confused with species of the -+ A. faurei complex (shape globular, contractile vacuole at dorsal wall of
vestibulum) and A. pyrforme SCHEWIAKOFF, 1892 (macronucleus vermicular or horseshoe-shaped; Fig. 6).
Astylozoon vagans (STILLER, 1939) has a mucous envelope. Astylozoon oxypus LEPSI, 1960, a very superfi-
cially described species, has, like A. fallax, a roundish macronucleus and might thus be a junior synonym. --)
Hastatella radians has prominent spines which, however, can become inconspicuous under certain circum-
stances, making separation from Astylozoon difficrilt. Opisthonecta species (-+ O. henneguyi) have a permanent
aboral ciliary wreath, two or more contractile vacuoles, and swim with the posterior end directed forward.
Euplanktonic vorticellids (-s Pelagovorticella mayeri, ) P. natans) are stalked. 2, 3, 4 are key characters for
identification.
453

Peritrichia
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Rare; in the plankton of tiny water bodies, ponds, and small lakes, but also in len-
tic sites of rivers. Throughout the year with high abundances from spring to autumn. The locus classicus is in
Leipzig, Germany, where ENGELMANN (1862) discovered Astylozoon fallax in the Elster River during March;
it was the sole ciliate species in the collecting jars for three months, indicating very good water quality. DING-
FELDER (1962) found A. fallax in Bavarian road puddles (up to 230 000 ind. I ') throughout the year, especially
in heavily polluted, that is, bacteria-rich sites with decaying leaf litter and hay. Further records substantiated by
illustrations: rare in Hungary (STILLER l97l); Tibet (SHEN 1983, WANG 1977). Records not substantiated by
illustrations: brook near Innsbruck, Austria, in July (DALLA TORRE 1891); stagnant water bodies near Sofia,
Bulgaria, in late July (DETCHEWA 1972); heavily polluted mud of the Moldavia River, Czechoslovakia, and
sometimes rather abundant in raw cultures from other habitats of this river (KALMUS 1928); in a small,
eutrophic lake of Germany tp to 6770 ind. l-' in 3 m during early May, in the second half of May it was very
abundant at a depth of 23 m, from June to mid-October only in 0-6 m (1340-2546 ind. l'), that is, in the epilim-
nion and the upper metalimnion (RECK 1987); with low relative abundance (0.3-0.4 7o) in an ox-bow of the Da-
nube River in Hungary during September and October (BERECZKY 1991); cooling plants of power stations in
Germany and Moldavia (BERNERTH 1982, CHORIK & VIKOL 1973); Poland (JAROCKI & JAKUBOWSKA
192'7); saline lakes in the USSR (BOUTCHINSKY 1895); pond in Japan (KUSANO 1985).
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria (DINGFELDER 1962). Biomass of 106 specimens about 30 mg when
70 pm long (FOISSNER et al. I992c). RECK (1987; see also previous paragraph) found A. fallax at following
conditions: 3.8-20.6"C (>1000ind.1-' at 3.8--20.6 C), pH 1.3-9.3 (p}J7.3-9.3),0.3-16.9 mgl-r Oz (4.3 to
16.9 mg lt), 3-177 7o Oz-saturation (59-177 Vo), 0.03-0.38 mg l-1 NH4.-N, (0.04-0.21mg f '). Astylozoon fallax
can live in rain puddles at 35o C (DINGFELDER 1962). Resting cysts spherical, with solid wall covered by thin,
granular envelope (DINGFELDER 1962; Fig. 5).
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Europe only. Rare, usually planktonic in small, eutrophic water
bodies. During all seasons, that is, eurythermic, but highest abundances from spring to autumn. As a bacteria
feeder, A. fallax very likely indicates eutrophic or highly eutrophic conditions, especially when occurring in con-
siderable (>1000 ind. l') number. Resting cysts known. Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et al.
(1992c): betamesosaprobic to alphamesosaprobic (b = 5, a = 5,I = 3, SI = 2.5).
_-PACC+UM
PD
V tltttt
CV I MI
MA
MA
,_MA
B R-- 2 5
Astylozoon fallax in vivo (1, 5, fiom FOISSNER 1917, redrawn tiom ENGELMANN 1862; 2, fiom FOISSNER 1977, redrawn fiom
STILLER 1971;3,4, from FOISSNER 1977, rsdrawn from DINGFELDER 1962). 1-3: Left lateral views, 87 pm, ? pm, ? pm. Note reni-
form shape ofmacronucleus and ventral position ofcontractile vacuole.4: Cylindrical specimen, ? pm. 5: Resting cyst, 38-50 pm in diame-
ter.
Astylozoon pyiforme in vivo (6, from FOISSNER 19'11 , redrawn from SCHEWIAKOFF 1893. 6: Left lateral view, 46-54 pm. Note longish
macronucleus.
AC = adoral ciliary spiral, BR = bristles at posterior end of cell, CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, PC =
peristomial collar, PD = peristomial disc, UM = undulating membrane, V = vestibulum.
454

Peritrichia
A s tylo zo o n faurei complex
1912 Astylozoon pyrifurme ENRIQUES, Rc. Sess. Accad. Sci. Ist. Bologno, l9lUl9l2:93 (a misidentified A.
enriquesi).
1935 Astylozoonfaurei KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 666 (revision).
1968 Astylozoonfaurei KAHL, 1935 - CHORIK, Planktonwimpertiere, p. 142 (illustrated record).
1972 Astylozoonfaurei KAHL - SLÄDEÖEK, Vöst. ösl. Spol. zool.,36:73 (illustrated record).
1977 Astylozoon faurei (KAHL, 1930-35) - FOISSNER, Protistologica, 13: 360 (revision).
1977 Asty lozoon enrique si FOISSNER, Protistologica, 13: 36 1 (revision).
1992 Astylozoon faurei KAHL, 1935 and Astylozoon enriquesi FOISSNER, 1911 - FOISSNER, BERGER &
KOHMANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192: 291, 293
("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
Astylozoon faurei and A. enriquesi differ mainly by the macronucleus, which is usually reniform in A. faurei
(Fig. l-3, 8b, 15, 28) and usually 3/+-circular in A. enriquesi (Fig. 4-6,8c, 11). However, transitions exist (Fig.
8b, c), so that an unequivocal identification is sometimes difficult, especially when only few specimens are avail-
able. Thus, we lump these two species in an "Astylozoon faurei complex", especially because the number of sil-
verlines is very similar (Fig. 12,29). Further studies about the variability of the macronucleus shape are needed.
KAHL (1935) established A. faurei for A. pyrifurme SCHEWIAKOFF, 1892 sensu FAURE-FREMIET (1924).
However, he ignored that his own population (Fig. 3) had a reniform macronucleus and the contractile vacuole at
the dorsal wall of the vestibulum. These are important, species-specific differences to the FAURE-FREMIET
(1924) population (macronucleus horseshoe-shaped, vacuole at ventral wall), which was correctly assigned to A.
pyrifurme by FAURE-FREMIET (1924) and FOISSNER (1977). Astylozoon faurei sensu GELEI & SZABA-
DOS (1950) also belongs to A. pyrifurme (FOISSNER 1977). Astylozoonfaurei setsu SHEN (1983) has the con-
tractile vacuole at the ventral wall of the vestibulum (misidentification or misobservation?).
Differential diagnosi
s
1) Extended cells in vivo 35-65 x 30-55 pm, that is, length about 1.2-1.4 times width (Fig. 1, 5, 6, 18).
2) Extended cells usually globular, sometimes pyrifom, faurei-type undemeath peristomial collar often dis-
tincfly narrowed, posterior end of globular specimens with small conical process (Fig. l, 3,6, 10, 18--22).
Contracted specimens globular to truncated cone-shaped (Fig.2q.
3) Macronucleus in transverse axis of cell, bean-shaped to elongate-reniform (A. faurei; Fig. 1-3, 8b, 15, 28) or
about3/+-circtlar (4. enriquesl; Fig. 4-6, 8c, 11).
4) Contractile vacuole at level of (4. faurei) or close underneath (A. enriquesi) peristomial collar at dorsal wall
of vestibulum (Fig. 1-6, lO, 19, 25).
s) Pellicle in both species with a total of about 38 distinct, widely spaced transverse striae (silverlines; Fig. 3,
12,26,29; data from A. enriquesi): 24-32 (tsually 27-29; n = 86, three populations) silverlines from anterior
end to anlage of aboral ciliary wreath andT-13 (usually 9-12) from aboral ciliary wreath to scopula.
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell. Peristomial collar conspicuous and projecting from body proper,
in A. faurei often only half as wide as body and thicker than in A. enriquesi. Peristomial disc slightly to dis-
tinctly convex and raised in feeding specimens (Fig. 1-3, 5, 6,9, l8). Vestibulum of usual size. Adoral ciliary
spiral and undulating membrane (haplokinety) describe about 1.1 turns on peristomial disc before plunging
into vestibulum, almost accomplishing a further tum (Fig. 3,5J).
t) Stalkless; scopula, however, present and bearing one or several inconspicuous bristles (Fig. 5, 8a, 10, 11,21).
8) Solitary, swims with anterior end (oral apparatus) directed forward.
455

Peritrichia
Similar species
Easily confused with -+ A. fallax (turnip-shaped or ellipsoidal, contractile vacuole at ventral wall of vestibulum)
and A. pyrifurme SCHEWIAKOFF, 1892 (contractile vacuole at ventral wall of vestibulum; Fig. 6 by -+ A. fal-
lax). Astylozoon vagans (STILLER, 1939) has a mucous envelope. -+ Hastatella radians has prominent spines,
which, however, can become inconspicuous under certain circumstances, making separation from -+ Astylozoon
difficult. Opisthonecta species (-+ O. henneguyi) have a permanent aboral ciliary wreath, two or more contrac-
tile vacuoles, and swim with the posterior end directed forward. Euplanktonic vorticellids (-s Pelagovorticella
mayeri, -) P. natans) are stalked. 2,3, 4 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in plankton of ponds and lakes, occasionally in reservoirs and running
waters. According to our experience, A. faurei prefers lakes and ponds, whereas A. enriquesi prefers temporary
puddles. KAHL (1935) discovered A.faurei in a pond at the zoo in Hamburg, Germany. Further records of A.
faurei substantiated by illustrations: 5 ind. l-r under ice in a beta- to alphamesosaprobic Czechoslovakian reser-
voir during February (SLÄDEÖEK 1972); Moldavian waters in summer (CHORIK 1968); up to 5400 ind. l-r in
the Central Baikal area (LOKOT 1987); Tibet (SHEN 1983; identification uncertain, -+ taxonomy); lake (Ibmer
See) in Salzburg, Austria (Fig. 10), and with high abundance in the spring plankton of a small, eutrophic lake
(Höglwörther See) in Bavaria (Fig. 18-29). Records of A. faürei not substantiated by illustrations: ponds in Bul-
garia during mid-February @ETCHEVA 1976); various water bodies in Czechoslovakia (MORAVCOVÄ
1977); sporadically in the benthal of a heavily polluted area of the Hamburg Harbour during winter (BARTSCH
& HARTWIG 1984); rice-field irrigated with water from the Po River, Italy (MADONI 1988); lp to 24 iird. cm-2
in polluted sections of north Italian running waters (MADONI 1980, MADONI & GHETTI1977); alphameso-
saprobic sites in a Polish river (HUL 1986, 1981); reservoir in Azerbaijan (ALEKPEROV 1983); fish ponds in
the USSR (MIRABDULLAEV 1988, 1989, OLEKSIV 1985, OLEKSIV et al. 1986); periphyton of a reservoir in
the USSR (BELOVA 1988); Balkhash Lake in Kazakhstan (TROSHINA 1994); freshwater in the Yuelushan
area, China, during winter (YANG 1989).
The locus classicus of A. enriquesi is the Gosau area, Austria, where FOISSNER (1977) discovered it in a loamy,
alpine pasture pond. Later, he found great numbers in similar biotopes along the Großglockner Road, Austria
(1700-1850 m above sea level); these temporal puddles had a pH near 5 and were usually eutrophified by cow
dung (FOISSNER 1977, 1979c). ENRIQUES (1912) found this species in an Italian drain, HUMPESCH &
Autecological data: Species of the A. faurei complex feed on bacteria (FOISSNER 1980b, SI-ÄOgÖgf tgZZ;
Fig. 18, 21). Biomass of 106 specimens 10 mg (CHORIK 1968; calculation error or from preserved specimens?)
to 50-60mg (FOISSNER et al. 1992c). SLÄDEÖEK 0912) found A. faurei at 14" C, 3.2mg l-1 BOD5,
1.6 mg l-r NH+*-N, 3.5 mg l-r NO:--N, 0.05 mg l-r NOz-N, 0.05 mg l-r PO+3-P, 0.6 mg l-, p,o,u,. DETCHEVA
(1981, 1983c) observed A.faurei in a Bulgarian river with 0.3 Va freqtency at20.5"C,pH7.6,4.8mg1-'Oz
(547o safiration), 7.2mg1-r KMnO4-consumption, 0.008mgl-r NH+*-N, gmgl-' NO:-N, 24.5mgfr Cl',
ll7 mgl-t SO+2-, 82 mg l-' Cah, 8.8 mg 11 Mg2*. FOISSNER et al. (1982) foundÄ. enriquesi in humic temporary
pools of the Austrian AIps at following conditions (5 analyses): 920"C, pH4.84.9,7.1-ll.6mgl-r Oz
(80-146 Vo satnration), 49-59 mg l-1 KMnOa-consumption, 0.0-1.8 mg lr NH4*-N, 0.0--0.9 mg l-' NOz -N,
0.0-2.9 mgl-rNO:-N,0.H.09mglr PO43:P, 106-107bacteÄaml-t. Astylozoon enriquesi sometimes encysts
within few hours after sampling. Cysts spherical,25-30 pm across, with 4 trrm thick, smooth wall (FOISSNER
t917).
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Europe and Asia only. Common, usually planktonic in stagnant
waters. Resting cysts known. During all seasons, that is, eurythermic. As bacteria feeders, species of the A. faurei
complex very likely indicate eutrophic or highly eutrophic conditions. Saprobic classification of A. faurei accord-
ing to FOISSNER et al. (1992c): betamesosaprobic to alphamesosaprobic (b = 5, a = 5, I = 3, SI = 2.5). Astylo-
zoon enriquesi indicates alphamesosaprobity (FOISSNER et al.1982).
456

Peritrichia
-AC + UM
V
MA
MY
AC
MY
AW
@@oGoG@Gee
Astylozoon faurei complex ( l-3, ttb, A. Jäurei;4-8a, c, A. enriquesi. l, fiom SLÄDE1Z« ßlZ; 2, fiom CHORIK l96tJ; 3, fionr FOISS-
NER 1977, redrawn from KAHL 1935; 4, from FOISSNER 1977,redrawn from ENRIQUES 1912; 5-8a, from FOISSNER 1977; 8b, plank-
tonic population from a lake [Höglwörther See] in Bavaria; 8c, originals ofthe FOISSNER 1977 population from the Großglockner area,
Austria. 1-6, in vivo; 7, 8a--c, protargol impregnation). 1-3: Left lateral views of extended specimens, 45 pm, 55 pm, 55-60 pm. 4, 6: Well
feed specimens, ?'pm,62 pm; oral ciliature in (6) after protargol impregnation. 5: Slender specimen, 50 pm. 7: Contractile apparatus (myo-
nemes) and oral and somatic ciliature. Arrow marks peniculus 3. 8a: Posterior portion with contractile fibres (myonemes), bristle attachment
site (scopula), and anlage of aboral ciliary wreath. 8b, c: Variability of macronuclers in A. faurei (b) and A. enriquesi (c). AC = adoral cili-
ary spiral, AW = anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, BR = bristles at posterior end of cell, CP = cytopyge, CV = contractile vacuole, FV = food
vacuoles, MA = macronucleus, MY = contractile fibres (myonemes), PC = peristomial collar, PD = peristomial disc, S = attachment site of
bristles (corresponding to the scopula of stalked peritrichs), UM = undulating membrale, V = vestibulum.
451



Peritrichia
,. :
ffi:.ffi ,
?:-fuLL.
2
t,i
2S
Astylozoon.faurei (originals of a population fiom the Höglwörther See in Bavaria. l8-28, in vivo; 29, silver carbonate impregnation)'
18-25: Freely motile specimens extended and slightly contracted (23,24). Arrow in (25) marks vestibular entrance. 26' 29: Pellicular stria-
tion.27: Bristles at posterior end. 28: The reniform macronucleus is the main distinctive character to A. enriquesi, which has an almost cir-
cular nucleus (Fig. 1 1). AW = anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, CV = contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuoles, MA = macronucleus.
459

Peritrichia
Hastatella radians ERLANGER, 18eo
l89O Hastatella radians ERLANGER, Z. wiss. Zool.,49: 651 .
1924 Hastatella radians ERLANGER - FAURE-FREMIET, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg., 6: 154 (illustrated record).
1933 Hastatella radians ERLANGER 1890 - WANG & NIE, Contr. biol. Lab. Sci. Soc. China, l0: 295 (rede-
scription from life).
1935 Hastatella radians ERLANGER, 1890 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 667 (revision).
1942 Hastatella radians ERLANGER - STILLER, Arch. Hydrobiol., 38: 379 (illustrated record).
1962 Hastatella radians ERLANGER 1890 - DINGFELDER, Arch. Protistenk., 105: 630 (illustrated record).
19'7'7 Hastatella radians (ERLANGER, 1890) - FOISSNER, Protistologica, 13: 363 (revision; redescription
from life and after silver impregnation).
1992 Hastatella radians ERLANGER, 1890 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte des
Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192: 295 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecological
monograph).
Taxonomy
Body size and shape as well as length and number of spines are highly variable (ENTZ 1904;Fig.20-25); thus,
Hastatella microradians GELEI, 1954 has been synonymized with H. radians by DINGFELDER (1962) and
FOTSSNER (1911).
Differential diagnosis
1) Extended cells in vivo 30-75 x 25-10 pm, usually <50 pm long, length 1-1.8 times width (Fig. 2,9, 13,35).
2) Extended cells usually slenderly to broadly ellipsoidal (Fig. 1, 8, 12, 14,31), rarely campanulate (Fig. 6,2q,
pyriform (Fig. 20) or cylindrical (Fig.2, l3). A girdle each of flattened, pellicular processes (spines) on peri-
stomial collar and near mid-body. Spines acontractile, directed backwards in swimming specimens, in float-
ing cells they extend horizontally andlor in various directions (Fig. 1, 6,1,11, 13, 14,20,28,37). Spine
shape (broadly to narrowly wedge-shaped), spine number (few to up to 40), and spine length (few to up to
40 pm) very variable because highly dependent on environmental conditions (see figure explanations), short
and long spines alternate irregularly within each girdle (Fig. 1,28,30,38-41). Fully contracted specimens
roughly fusiform; myonemes (contractile fibres; visible only after protargol impregnation) well developed,
thickened in equatorial girdle region (Fig. 5, 26; irnportant difference to all other peritrichs in protargol
preparations, where spines are often not impregnated);
3) Macronucleus in transverse axis of cell, almost circular (Fig. 1, 9,26, 27).
4) Contractile vacuole slightly undemeath peristomial collar at dorsal wall of vestibulum (Fig. l, 2,8,25).
s) Pellicle with a total of abot24 rather distinct, widely spaced striae (silverlines; Fig. 1, 15, 18, 28,29,41):
13-22 (mean = 17) silverlines from anterior end to anlage of aboral ciliary wreath and 5-9 (mean = 7) from
4boral ciliary wreath to scopula.
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell. Peristomial collar, bearing oral girdle of spines, slightly to dis-
tinctly projecting from body proper. Peristomial disc slightly to distinctly convex and + obliquely raised in
feeding specimens. Vestibulum of usual size, about 1/3 of body length (Fig. 1, 2). Adoral ciliary spiral and
undulating membrane (haplokinety) describe 1 tum on peristomial disc before plunging into vestibulum, ac-
complishing a further turn (Fig. l, 3, 4, 26, 27).
t) Stalkless; scopula, however, present and bearing one or several inconspicuous bristles, indicating a stalked
ancestor (Fig. 1, 2, 6, 10, 15,32-34).
8) Solitary, swims and jumps with anterior end directed forward, frequently changing direction by heavy strokes
of spines.
460

Peritrichia
Similar species
Very conspicuous and thus easy to identify. Hastatella aesculacantha JAROKI & JAKUBOWSKA, 1927, a very
rare species, has four spine girdles. --; Astylozoon species lack spines; note, however, that the spines of llas-
tatella are sometimes rather small and thus difficult to discem (Fig. 8, 35, 40).Inexperienced workers may con-
fuse Hastatella with some oligotrichs (+ Halteria, -+ Pelagohalteria, -s Limnostrombidium, --> Pelagostrom-
bidium), which have, however, adoral membranelles and body processes composed of fused cllia. 2 (two spine
girdles) and 6 (adoral ciliary spiral) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: An extraordinary but not very cornmon euplanktonic ciliate, which prefers tempo-
rary, eutrophic waters, such as road pools and pasture ponds; occasionally in lakes and slowly running brooks and
rivers. Locus classicus is the bank of the Neckar River, Germany, where ERLANGER (1890) discovered H. radi-
ans in a rock-pool. Locus classicus of the synonym H. microradians ls a temporary pasture pond in the Hungarian
mountains (GELEI 1954). FOISSNER (1977) found 11. radians near Salzburg, Austria, in a road pool with decay-
ing hay. Further records mostly substantiated by illustrations: ponds, polluted freshwater canals, and rivers in Bel-
gium and the Netherlands throughout the year (GILLARD 1947, 1950, SORGELOOS 1970, VERSCHAFFELT
1930; Fig. Z04l); betamesosaprobic section of Moldavia River, Czechoslovakia (§nÄUpf-UU§gf 1948); near
Lyon and near Paris, France (BEAUCHAMP & COLLIN 1910, FAURE-mnUfBf ß24); lp to 1.75 x
105 ind. 1-' in heavily polluted road puddles but also in clean puddles on woodland paths in Bavaria, Germany
(DINGFELDER 1962); flooded meadow in Hungary during spring and early summer (STILLER 1942a);
Moldavia (CHORIK 1968); Ukrainian pond during winter (KOVALCHUK & SVINTSOVA 1994); abundant in a
temporary pasture pond in Poland (CZAPIK & JORDAN 1916): very abundant in ponds near Nanking, China,
during winter (WANG & NIE 1933); few specimens from ditch water at Vijayawada (India) in May (NAIDU
1965); Baikal area (LOKOT 1987); littoral of North Twin Lake in Iowa, USA (KUTKUHN 1958).
Hastatella radians is easy to identify; thus, also records not substantiated by illustrations are reliable: puddles in
Bulgarian mountain villages during August and September (DETSCHEWA 1972); eutrophic pond (Poppelsdor-
fer Weiher) in Germany (WILBERT 1968); reservoir (Pleißestausee) in Germany (SCHARF 1961); polysaprobic
area of Hamburg harbour, Germany, in spring (HECKMAN et al. 1990); road puddles in Hungary (GELEI
1950); ponds in Russia (OLEKSIV 1985); near Kiev and in ephemeral waters of the Seversky Donets Basin,
Ukraine (DOBROVLIANSKI 1914, KRAVCHENKO 1969); water bodies near Beijing. China, during summer
(SHEN & JIANG 1979);eutrophic Chinese lake in autumn (GONG 1986).
Records from running waters: Beli Lom River. Bulgaria (RUSEV et al. 1988); lowland brook in Germany
(HEUSS 1976);betamesosaprobic Elbe River at the Geesthacht weir, Germany (GRIMM 1968); cooling system
of a conventional power station at a mesosaprobic'river in Germany (BERNERTH 1982); ox-bows of Danube
River in Hungary and Slovakia (BERECZKY 1991, SZENTIVÄNY & TIRJAKOVAßSq; Lielupe River, Lat-
via (LIEPA 1913, 1978); mesosaprobic Lyna River, Poland (HUL 1987); Scioto River in Ohio, USA (LACKEY
1938b). According to GILLARD (1947) and VERSCHAFFELT (1930) also in brackish waters.
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria (CZAPIK & JORDAN 1976, DINGFELDER 1962,G8LEI1950, GELEI
et al. 1954). Biomass of 106 specimens according to CHORIK (1968) about 10 mg (calculation error?), according
to FOISSNER et al. (1992c) 30 mg when 50 x 30 pm in size. GILLARD (1947), SCHARF (1961) and DING-
FEiDER (1962) found H. radians at following conditions (from FOISSNER 1977): lM3" C, pH6.4-7.8,
1.1mmoll-rcarbonate hardness, 18mgl-'COzr."",2mgl-t NH+*-N,7.5mgl-l NO:-N,0.1 mgl-'NOz-N,
64 mgl-t Cf, 0.5 mg l-r Fe2*, 0.2 mg l-' phenols.
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Eurasia only. Infrequent and usually planktonic in temporary and
permanent pools as well as in slowly flowing waters, especially when abundance of bacteria, the preferred food,
is high. Resting cysts known (Fig. 19). Throughout the year, eurythermic and oligo-euryhaline. Saprobic classifi-
cation according to FOISSNER et al. (1992c): betamesosaprobic to alphamesosaprobic (o = 1, b = 6, a = 3,I = 3,
SI = 2.2).
46t

Peritrichia
OS
-CV
CP
\
SP
MY
:__BR
AC-
MY-
-P[
1
6ffi
vv
rg 19
/ro
Hastatellaradinns (l-5,fiomFOISSNER 19'7'7:6, T,fiomFOISSNER l9TT,redrawnfiomERLANGER 1890; 8-l0,fiom
FOISSNER 1977,redrawn from DINGFELDER 1962. 1,2,6-10, in vivo; 3-5, protargol impregnation). 1: Freely motile
specimen with spines directed backwards, 75 pm. Oral ciliature after protargol-impregnated cells (see Fig. 3, 4, 26,27). 2:
Cylindrical specimen (cp. Fig. 13) immediately before contraction, 75 pm. Note that spines extend in various directions, in-
dicating that they can be moved individually. 3, 4: Oral ciliature seen from different perspectives (cp. Fig. 26,27). Arrow in
(3) marks germinal kinety from which the new oral ciliature develops during division. Arrowhead denotes an argyrophilic
structure of unknown function. Note short peniculus 3. 5: System of contractile fibres (myonemes), 56 pm. Arrow denotes
myonemes in peristomial disc. Note that the myonemes are thickened in the equatorial spine region. This peculiarity makes it
possible to identify H. radians in protargol slides even if the spines are unstained. 6: Lateral view, 40 pm. Arrow marks bris-
tle originating from stalk attachment site (scopula; cp. character 7 and Fig. 29,31-34).7: Frontal view showing the two gir-
dles of spines. 8: Specimen without equatorial spine girdle and only four very short processes in the oral girdle. 9: Specimen
with short and thus inconspicuous spines. 10: "microradians" form (-+ taxonomy). AC = adoral ciliary spiral, AW = anlage
of aboral ciliary wreath, BR = bristle at posterior end of cell, CP = cytopyge, CV = contractile vacuole, ES = equatorial gir-
dle of spines, FV = food vacuole, MA = macronucleus, MY = myonemes (contractile fibres), OS = oral girdle of spines, PD
= peristomial disc, PEl-3 = peniculi, SP = spines (pellicular processes), UM = undulating membrane (haplokinety).
462

Peritrichia
ffi,7"'u'
4 :tuii!!--.r,a fu n- :l-j,t:
18
Hastatella radians ( I I 19, fiom FOISSNER I 977; population fiorn a road puddle with decaying hay near the City of Sal-
zburg. I l-14, 16, 19, in vivo phase contrast micrographs; 15, 17, 18, silver nitrate impregnation). ll-l4z Lateral views
showing the high variability in body shape and length and number of spines. Arrows mark spines of equatorial girdle. 15:
Lateral view of silverline system. Arrows denote the slightly staggered spines of the equatorial girdle. Arrowhead marks an-
lage of aboral ciliary wreath. 16: Frontal view. 17: The silverline system extends into the spines. 18: Posterior polar view of
silverline system. Arrow marks scopula (-+ character 7), arrowhead denotes anlage of aboral ciliary wreath. 19: Resting cyst
with wrinkled surface. OS = oral girdle of spines, S = scopula, SP = spines.
463

Peritrichia
h*+UIIJI
26 2T
Hastatella radians (2O-27 , originals of a population fiom the plankton of the Schelde River in Ghent, Belgium . 2(125, in vivo; 26, 27 , pro-
targol impregnation).20-23: Lateral views (20,22), oblique lateral view (21), and frontal view (23) offield specimens. Note enornous
length of spines. 24, 25: Spines significantly decrease in number and length when specimens reproduce for some weeks in patch cultures.
Arrow marks vestibular entrance. 26,27:, Cillalare and macronucleus (cp. Fig. 3, 4). Arrow in (26) denotes the germinal kinety from which
the new oral ciliature develops during division. AC = adoral ciliary spiral, AW = anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, CV = contractile vacuole,
MA = macronucleus, MY = myonemes (contractile fibres), PE1-3 = peniculi, SP = spines, UM = undulating membrane (haplokinety).
464

Peritrichia
Hastatella radians (28-34, original scanning electron micrographs of a population [fietd material ] fiom the plankton of the Schelde River in
Ghent, Belgium). 28, 30,31: Lateral, oblique frontal, and posterior polar view of conffacted specimens with very long spines of highly dif-
ferent length (arrows in 30). 29: Detail of pellicle near posterior end of cell showing the anlage of the aboral ciliary wreath, the bristle at the
posterior end, and the fine striae, which contain the silverlines (cp. Fig. 15, 18). 32-341 Posterior polar views showing the scopula (-+ char-
acter 7 ) and pellicular pores (arrows). Note variability of bristle complex originating from scopula. AS = adoral ciliary spiral, AW = anlage
of aboral ciliary wreath, BR = bristles originating from scopula at posterior end of cell, ES = equatorial girdle of spines, OS = oral girdle of
spines.
465

Peritrichia
Hastatella radians \3541, originals of a population fiom the plankton of the Schelde River in Ghent, Belgium. .35-37, in vivo; 38-41,
scanning electron micrographs). The number and size of the spines decrease markedly when specimens reproduce in patch cultures for some
weeks (cp. Fig. 35, 40, 41 with Fig. 28,30,31,39). 35-37: Lateral and frontal views. 38: "Stany sky", a low magnification SEM micro-
graph ofa young culture.39: Frontal view ofcontracted specimens.40r 41: Oral and aboral view. Arrowhead in (41) marks anlage ofaboral
ciliary wreath. AC = adoral ciliary spiral, ES = equatorial girdle of spines, FV = food vacuoles, OS = oral girdle of spines.
466

Peritrichia
O pisthone cta he nne guyi reuRe-rRsMrET, 1906
19O6 Opisthonecta henneguyi f'RURE-f'RBMIET, C. r. Sdanc. Soc. Biol., 6O:922 (without illustration).
1924 Opiuhonecta henneguyi FAURE-FREMIET - FAURE-FREMIET, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg. Suppl., 6: 159 (de-
tailed, illustrated description).
1935 Opisthonecta henneguyi FAURE-FR., 1924 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 663 (revision).
1962 Opisthonecta henneguy FAURE-FREMIET 1906 - DINGFELDER, Arch. Protistenk., 105: 622 (illus-
trated record; incorrect subsequent spelling).
1975 Opisthonecta henneguyi (FAURE-FREMIET, 1906, 1924) - FOISSNER, Protistologica, 11: 406
(revision).
1975 Opisthonecta patula FOISSNER, Protistologica, ll: 406 (synonym; morphometry and silverline system).
1992 Opisthonecta patula FOISSNER, 1915 - AUGUSTIN & FOISSNER, Arch. Protistenk., l4l:262 (detailed
redescription from life and after silver impregnation).
1992 Opisthonecta henneguyi FAURE-FREMIET, 1906 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informa-
tionsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192:299 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic
and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
The differences between O. henneguyi md O. patula are insufficient, that is, caused by minor misobservations
and environmental variables (FOISSNER et al. 1992c). Telotrochidium henneguyi sensu FINLEY &
MCLAUGHLIN (1965) and FINLEY et al. (1972) is only 50-70 pm long and thus very likely not identical with
O. henneguyi (FOISSNER 1975). These papers are thus not considered here. The identification by GELEI (1954)
is also uncertain (FOISSNER 1975). Opisthonecta henneguyi sensu KOFOID & ROSENBERG (1940) has only
two contractile vacuoles, indicating that it is O. bivacuolata FOISSNER. Ultrastructure, division, and conjuga-
tion of O. henneguyi have been investigated by BRADBURY (1965), GUINEA et al. (1986), and SOLA et al.
(1985, 1989).
Differential diagnosis
1) Extended cells in vivo 90-170 x 80-130 pm, that is, length abor:l,2.4 times width (Fig. 1, 13).
2) Extended cells truncated cone-shaped, posterior end slightly convex (Fig. a, 5, 18), in morbid specimens or at
low oxygen tension, as well as in slightly squeezed cells, almost hemispherical (Fig. 1, 2, 8. 13-16). Con-
tracted specimens globular because contractile apparatus strongly developed (Fig. 6, 9, 17; contractile fibres
only recognizable after protargol impregnation). Wilh permanent. conspicuous aboral ciliary wreath (used for
movement) composed of numerous short, oblique ciliary rows (Fig.5, 6,9-12, 17-19).
3) Macronucleus in transverse axis of cell, almost circular (Fig. a-7,11).
4) Usually 4 (rarely only 3) contractile vacuoles, two each at ventral and dorsal wall of vestibulum (Fig. 1,2, 4,
5,8, 15, 16).
s) Pellicle with a total of about 120 rather narrowly spaced transverse striae (silverlines; Fig. l, 5, 12, l7):
64-82 (usually about 73) silverlines from anterior end to aboral ciliary wreath and3l-57 (usually aboü47)
from aboral ciliary wreath to scopula (Fig. 12).
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar inconspicuous, that is, hardly projecting be-
yond body proper. Peristomial disc usually slightly convex and + obliquely raised in feeding specimens. Ves-
tibulum conspicuous, extends slightly obliquely to mid-body (Fig. 1, 5,9,14). Adoral ciliary spiral and undu-
lating membrane (haplokinetyl describe 1.25 tums on peristomial disc before plunging into vestibulum, ac-
complishing 2.5-3 further tums. Epistomial membrane at distal end of adoral ciliary spiral, composed of a
short row of 5-8 cilia, forming an about 25 pm long bundle easily recognizable in live specimens (Fig. 1,
s-9. r r, 20).
461

Peritrichia
7) Stalkless; scopula, however, present, indicating a stalked ancestor (Fig. l, 4,8,12,18).
8) Solitary, swims continuously and usually very fast with the posterior end, that is, the permanent aboral ciliary
wreath, directed forwards.
Similar species
Opisthonecta bivacuolata FOISSNER (anterior end usually narrower) has only two contractile vacuoles, and O.
minima FOISSNER (cylindrical) has only one contractile vacuole. Telotrochidiun species are also stalkless and
free-swimming, but lack an epistomial membrane and have a cylindrical body. -+ Astylozoon species lack the
aboral ciliary wreath and thus swim with the anterior end directed forward. For beginners, Opisthonecta hen-
neguyi is difficult to distinguish from swarmers of sessile peritrichs, which are usually smaller than 90 pm (but
see Campanella umbellaria and Carchesium polypinrzru, FOISSNER et al. 1992c) and have only a single con-
tractile vacuole. 4, 6,'7 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in stagnant, eutrophic waters, preferring the warm seasons; also; fre-
quent in small ephemeral water bodies because it can very rapidly make resting cysts having a smooth surface
and a diameter of 50-90 pm (DINGFELDER 1962, FOISSNER 1979a, WALKER et al. 1989). FAURE-FREMI-
ET (1906, 1924) discovered O. henneguyi in clean and polluted waters of France. FOISSNER (1915) found it in
a pool polluted with waste water, in a road pool slightly polluted with liquid manure, and in a pasture pond in
Austria. In the sampling jars, specimens accumulated near the oxygen-rich surface layer. Further records substan-
tiated by illustrations: up to 140 000 ind. l-r in road pools, especially in those containing leaves and hay, of Ba-
varia (DINGFELDER 1962); abtndant in a goose pond and rare in flooded meadows of Bavaria from March to
October (DINGFELDER 1962); stream and ephemeral pond in Madrid, Spain (GUINEA & FERNÄN»EZ-
GALIANO 1987, GUINEA et al. 1986, SOLA et al. 1985); abundant in pond water from Nanking, China, during
January and February (WANG & NIE 1933); North America (BRADBURY 1965, LYNCH & NOBLE 1931);
littoral of a lake in Uganda (DRAGESCO 1912b).
Records not substantiated by illustrations: eutrophic, excavated lake in Styria, Austria (KRAINER 1988); very
abundant in heavily polluted running waters during northern Italy (MADONI 1980, MADONI & GHETTI
1977); slighrly to heavily polluted sections in a Polish river (CZAPIK 1982).
Opisthonecta henneguyi has been reliably recorded from activated sludge (e.g. CURDS 1975, AUGUSTIN &
FOISSNER 1992),where it indicates low quality effluent (BODs >30 mg[; CURDS & COCKBURN 1970b).
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria and small flagellates (DINGFELDER 1962, FOISSNER 1975). Biomass
of 106, about 140 x 120 pm-sized specimens approximately 1000 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1992c). DETCHEVA
(1983c, 1993) found O. henneguyi with 0.6-4 7o freqtency in various Bulgarian rivers at 8-24" C, pH7.4-8.4,
7.5-9.4mglr Oz (63-93Eo saturation),33-52mglr Ca2*,8-39mgl-r Mg2+, 104-l28mgl-1 HCO:-, about
I
40 mg I SO+3 , about 12 mg I ' Cl-, 0.01 mg 1-1 NH+*-N, 0.4-2.1 mg l-' NOr -N, <0.006-0.15 mg l-1 NOz -N. Up-
per temperature limit 50" C, lower pH limit 5.8 (DINGFELDER 1962). LDso of X-ray and gamma radiation
about 750 J kg' (SUTTON 1976; identification doubtful, population possibly identical with that of FINLEY et
al. 1912, -+ taxonomy). Swimming velocity about 1 mm s-1 (JAHN & HENDRIX 1969). Opisthonecta hen-
neguyi is occasionally parasitized by a suctorian, Endosphaera engelmanni ENTZ (ESTEBAN et al. 1989,
LYNCH & NOBLE 1931, MATTHES 1988).
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Eurasia and Africa. Planktonic and benthic, especially during the
warm seasons. Common and sometimes very numerous in stagnant, polluted waters (ponds, pools), where there
is an abundance of the preferred food, that is, bacteria and small flagellates; also in ephemeral pools because it
can make resting cysts. Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et al. (1992c): betamesosaprobic to
polysaprobic (b = 3, a= 4,p = 3, I = 2, SI = 3.0).
468

Peritrichia
irt...1i.r.r.r,,.,......ii,fr1
UM
i}
|" 1t . ., /!.;', ,,
,";?/
,Ü
PD
PC
P
V
V
CV
CV MA
CS
FV
AW
I
AC
UM
MY
PE1 EM
MY
-PE3
Opisthonecta henneguyi (1, fiom FAURE-FREMIET 1924;2, fiom WANG & NIE 1933; 3,4,6,7, fiorn AUGUSTIN & FOISSNER 1992;
5, from FOISSNER 1975. l,2,4, 5, in vivo; 3, 6, 7, protargol impregnation). 1,2,4, 5z Right and left lateral views, 160 pm, 150 pm, 100
pm, 140 ;rm. 3: Part of vestibular ciliature. 6, 7: Nuclear apparatus, oral and somatic ciliature, and myoneme system of left and right side of
same specimen, 88 pm. AC = adoral ciliary spiral, AW = aboral ciliary wreath, CP = cytopyge, CS = cytostome, CV = contractile vacuoles,
EM = epistomial membrane, FV = food vacuoles, § = germinal kinety from which the new oral ciliature develops during division, MA =
macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, MY = myonemes, pQ = peristomial collar, p) = peristomial disc, PE1-3 = peniculi (adoral mem-
branelles), SS = transverse striae of pellicle (corresponding to silverline system), UM = undulating membrane, V = vestibulum.
469

Peritrichia
tx
Opisthonecta henneguyi (8-12, liom FOISSNER 1975. 8,9, in vivo phase contrast micrographs; 10, 12, silver nitrate irn-
pregnation; l l, protargol impiegnation). 8, 9: Two extended specimens and a contracted cell (middle). Shape slightly modi-
fied due to slight cover glass pressure. All specimens are packed with food vacuoles, frequently masking the contractile
vacuoles. Arrow in (8) denotes swimming direction (posterior end directed forward!). Arrow in (9) marks aboral ciliary
wreath. 10: Silverline system at aboral ciliary wreath. 11: Ciliature and macronucleus. Arrow denotes the two turns of the
adoral ciliary spiral in the vestibulum. 12: Total view of silverline system. The stalkless peritrichs probably have stalked an-
cestors, as indicated by the presence of a stalk attachment site (scopula). AC = adoral ciliary spiral, AW = aboral ciliary
wreath, CV = contractile vacuoles, EM = epistomial membrane (a short ciliary row of unknown function; distinguishes Opis-
thonecta from Telotrichidium, another genus of the free-swimming peritrichs), MA = almost circular macronucleus, S =
scopula ("stalk attachment site"), UM = undulating membrane (haplokinety).
170

Peritrichia
1S
pt *ffi
,'f r{ ,E W.W WN
:'e.
ti'
;*11,+)l
T ai,i t:|,W. ,ß
" # --ffi.^.w
15 r§
Opisthonectahenneguyi (13-20, fiom FOISSNER etal.1992c. l3-16, in vivo; 17-20, scanning electron micrographs). 13: Typical, fieely
motile specimen. 14-16: Slightly squeezed specimens showing general organization, especially the contractile vacuoles (arrows in 15 and
16). Arrow in (14) marks vestibular entrance. 17, 20: Oblique anterior polar view and detail of contracted specimen. 18: Posterior polar
view. Note minute scopula (arrow) lacking any stalk structures. 19: Detail of aboral ciliary wreath (cilia partially detached). AW = aboral
ciliary wreath, EM = epistomial membrane, FV = food vacuols, pQ = peristomial collar, PD = peristomial disc.
471

Peritrichia
Trichodina pediculus
EHRENBERG, 1 83 1
This species is a parasite of freshwater invertebrates and fish, but casually detached specimens are fre-
quently found, albeit rarely in great numbers, in plankton samplesl thus, we included it in the present
compilation, together with T. domerguei megamicronucleata, a specific epibiont of planktonic copepods.
l83l Trichodina pediculus EHRENBERG, Abh. dt. Akad. Wiss. Berl., year 1831: 98 (without illustration).
1838 Trichodina pediculus (MÜLLER, 1773) - EHRENBERG, Infusionsthierchen, p. 266 (illustration).
1935 Trichodina pediculus EHRENBERG, 1830 - KAHL, Tierwelt. Dtl., 30: 658 (revision).
1959 Trichodina pediculrs (O. F. MÜLLER, 1786) EHRENBERG, 1838 - RAABE, Acta parasir. pol.,7: 192
(description of adhesive disc after silver impregnation and comparison with 7. domerguei).
1961 Trichodina pediculzs EHRENBERG, 1838 - KAZUBSKI, Acta Protozool., 5: 37 (morphogenetic and
morphometric study).
1988 Trichodina pediculus (O. F. MÜLLER 1786) EHRENBERG 1838 - GUHL & HAIDER, Prorozoenfauna,
1 ll:259 (revision).
1992 Trichodina pediculus EHRENBERG, 183 1 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte
des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192: 304 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecologi-
cal monograph).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
Nomenclature according to FOISSNER (1987b). GUHL & HAIDER (1988) stated that T. pediculus does not
parasitize fish; however, this has been disproved by morphometric studies of silver-impregnated populations
from several fish species (for example. ARTHUR & LOM 1984,KAZUBSKI 1967, l99lc, LOM 1970). The
ultrastructure of T. pediculus was investigated by HAUSMANN & HAUSMANN (1981a, b). Available illustra-
tions of live specimens are highly schematized; thus, we refer mainly to the micrographs in the following de-
scription.
D il-teren I ial d iagno s is
1) Extended cells in vivo 35-100 pm in diameter (width) and 30-100 pm high (length), usually about 60 x
60 pm, height of fully contracted specimens only 0.3 times diameter (Fig. 6, 8, l8-21, 35).
2) Extended cells bobbin-shaped with anterior and posterior end distinctly concave (Fig. 18-21, 33, 34). Con-
tracted or detached specimens usually flattened coin-like (Fig. 1, 5,29,36).
3) Macronucleus in transverse axis of cell, almost circular (Fig.9, 21,23,35); micronucleus about 3 x 1.5 pm,
at inner side ofright halfofmacronucleus (seen from anterior).
1) Contractile vacuole near mid-body (Fig. 20,35).
s) Pellicle smooth and without transverse or reticulate silverlines (Fig. 29 , 33).
6) Oral appaiatus occupies anterior end of cell, without distinct peristomial collar. Peristomial disc flat and
obliquely extending to cytostome in feeding specimens, convex in contracted and morbid cells. Vestibulum
inconspicuous (Fig. 9, 18,20,21,34). Adoral ciliary spiral and undulating membrane (haplokinety) describe
about 1 V+ l,rtrns at margin of anterior body end before plunging into vestibulum, accomplishing a further turn.
Peniculus 3 horseshoe-shaped and underneath peniculi 1 and2 (Fig.4,20,29,34).
7) Posterior end occupied by complicated holdfast consisting of 3 (lateral, outer, inner) ciliary wreaths and an
adhesive disc. Disc concave, consists of a denticle ring surrounded by narrowly spaced radial pins; centre of
disc dark after silver impregnation (Fig. 7,9,24-30,32,33,36). Denticle ring very conspicuous in silver ni-
trate preparations, 15-46 pm across, consists of 24-36, usually about 30 denticles; length of denticle blade
3-6 pm, length of ray 6-1 1 pm; 7-11 radial pins per denticle (Fig. 7, 11,24-28).
412

Peritrichia
8) Epizoic on a wide range of hosts, detached specimens survive some time and may thus be found in the pela-
gial, where they rotate and stagger very rapidly with the holdfast organelle directed forward.
Similar species
Trichodina pediculus is the sole member of the family (Urceolariidae), except for T. zambeziensis VAN AS &
BASSON (25-34 pm in diameter, 16-20 denticles, recorded from Africa only), which lives on freshwater hydro-
zoans and bryozoans (GUHL & HAIDER 1988). Specimens parasitizing fish are difficult to separate from T. ni-
gra LOJß;{ (19-25, usually abott 2l denticles), T. mutabilis KAZUBSKI & MIGALA (blade of denticle usually
less curved and ray very fine after silver impregnation), and I. domerguei WALLENGREN (centre of adhesive
disc does not impregnate with silver nitrate; Fig. 17). Detached specimens should not be confused with T. domer-
guei megamicronucleata DOGIEL (coin-shaped , 19-22 denticles, micronucleus conspicuous; Fig. 37-43), which
lives on planktonic copepods (Diaptomus, Eudiaptomus) only; for further details on this epiplanktonic species
and its synonym, T. domerguei diaptomus, see DOGIEL (1940), GUHL & HAIDER (1988), §RÄNIBI(-IIU§EK
(1953), and explanation to Figures 3743. Urceolaria species lack the ray on the denticle. 7 (adhesive disc; use
silver nitrate impregnation), 8 (non-crustacear. hosts) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common epibiont of freshwater hydrozoans (e.g. EHRENBERG 1838, KA-
ZUBSKI l99la), bryozoaris (Plumatella repens, Cristatella mucedo), amphibian larvae (e.g. Triturus vulgaris,
Bufo bufo, Rana spp.; e.g. KAZUBSKI 1991b), and juvenile and adult fish (e.g. Abramis brama, Archistichthys
nobilis, Carassius auratus, Coregonus albula, Cyprinus carpio, Esox lucius, Leucaspius delineatus, My,lopharyn-
godon piceus, Scardinius erythrophthalmus, Stizostedion lucioperca; e.g. KAZUBSKI l99lc, KEPR 1991, LOM
1970). Detailed summary of older literature, see KEISER (1921).
Trichodina pediculus occurs throughout the year and scrambles rapidly over the host with the aid of the posterior
cilia girdles and the holdfast organelle, producing conspicuous pustules on the epidermis (Fig. 22,31,33). De-
tached specimens swim with considerable velocity and are found frequently and sometimes rather abundantly in
rhe plankron of sragnant (BÜRGI er al. 1985, NAEF & MARTIN 1985,1993a, b, WESENBERG-LUND 1952,
ZACHARIAS 1900) and running waters, for example, in the Danube River and its ox-bows in Hungary (NOSEK
& BERECZKY l98l).
Very many, non-planktonic records from all freshwater habitats where the hosts live. Marine records (e.g.
LACKEY 1961) doubtful; VERSCHAFFELT (1930) classified T. pediculus as alphamesohaline. So far recorded
from Europe, Asia (e.g. TAI 1931, WANG 1925), North America (JAMES-CLARK 1866), and South America
(CORDERO 1922). Afncan trichodinids from fish previously referred to as I. pediculus have been recognized to
be distinct species (VANS AS & BASSON 1989).
Autecotogical data: Feeds mainly on bacteria, occasionally on algae and organic debris (BICK 1912b, BÜRGI
et al. 1985, SCHNEIDER 1985); populations parasitizing fish also feed on epithelial cells. Biomass of 106 speci-
rnens 65 mg (BÜRGI et al. 1985) to 80 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1992c). MIHAILOWITSCH (1989) fotndT. pedi-
culus two times in German running waters at 13-15 oC, pH 1.6-1 .1 ,15-17mglICO2r,".,6.6-8.8mglrOz,
0.1 mg I I NH+*-N, 0.1 mg I ' NOz -N, 3.9 mg l-r NOI-N,3543 mg l-r C1-, 640-660 pS cm-r specific conductivity.
Trichodina pediculus and many other trichodinids parasitize the skin and gills of freshwater fish. Healthy hosts
usually bear only few parasites, whereas stressed fish, e.g., by scarcity of food or oxygen, poor water quality or
crowding, are often heavily infested (trichodiniasis). Trichodinids can damage the epidermis by their holdfast
(Fig. 3l), often producing severe ulceration ofthe host's skin by secondary infection with bacteria and/or fungi
(details see IMAI et al. 1991, LOM 1973). Populations colonizing hydras and bryozoans are often associated
with Kerona pediculus, a well-known hypotrichous ciliate (FOISSNER et al. 1991). Neither Trichodina nor
Kerona release the nematocysts of the hydras (HAUSMANN & HAUSMANN 198la, b,ZICK 1932).
413

Peritrichia
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded only from Eurasia. Epibiontic, euryoecious parasite of hydrozoans,
bryozoans, fish, and tadpoles; occasionally detached and then planktonic in lakes, ponds, and large rivers. Feeds
mainly on bacteria, but also on host skin cells. Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et al. (1992c):
betamesosaprobic (o = 2,b = 6, a = 2,I = 3, SI = 2.0).
W
,ffi,
1
PD
ft
€
C
\\ //
AW
I 10
WF
13 14
CV DE
Trlchodinapediculus (l-3, tiom EHRENBERG 1838;4, fiom LOM 1964;5,6,8,9, tidm GUHL & HAIDER 1988; 7, 10, ll, liom
RÄABE lg5g. l-3, 5, 6,8, g, in vivo; 4, protargol impregnation; 7, silver nitrate impregnation of a population from Pelmatohydra oligactis;
10, 1 1, iron-haematoxylin stain). 1, 2, 5, 61 8r 9: Schematic lateral views of extended and + completely contracted specimens, diameter
35-100 pm. 3: Frontal view, 70 pm. 4: Oral ciliature in vestibulum. Arrow marks germinal kinety from which the new oral ciliature devel-
ops during division. The dotted area is an argyrophilic structure of unknown function. 7: Adhesive disc with ring of denticles, 48 pm. Note
dark, that is, stained centre of disc (important difference to T. domerguei domerguei, Fig. 17). 10, 11: Portion of denticle ring and single,
about 15 pm long denticle. A = number or radial pins per denticle, AC = adoral ciliary spiral, AW = outer (aboral) ciliary wreath, DE = den-
ticles, DI = diameter of denticle ring, IC = inner (aboral) ciliary wreath, LC = lateral (aboral) ciliary wreath, MA = macronucleus, pp = peri-
ppl
stomial disc, = peniculus 3, UM = undulating membrane (haplokinety), x = length of denticle blade, y = length of denticle ray.
Trichodina domerguei domerguei (12, 15, 16, from GUHL & HAIDER 1988; 13, 14, 17,ftom RAABE 1959. 12, 15, 16, in vivo; 13, 14,
iron-haematoyxlin stain; 17, silver nitrate impregnation). 12, 15, 16: Lateral views of extended and contracted specimens, diameter 50-70
pm. 13, 14: Portion of denticle ring and single, about l2 pm long denticle. L7: Adhesive disc with ring of denticles, 50 pm. Note white, that
is, unstained centre ofdisc (important difference toT. pediculus, Fig.7). CV = contractile vacuole, DE = denticles.
474

Peritrichia
ffi&
*s
Trichodinapediculus (18-23, from FOISSNER et al. 1992c; 18-22, population fiorn hydra of a hypertrophic pond in Sal-
zburg City; 23, specimen from a young roach, Rutilus rutilus.lS-21, in vivo bright field micrographs;22, scanning electron
micrograph; 23, orcein stain). 18-21: Extended specimens showing the typical bobbin-shape and the excavated anterior end.
The holdfast (denticle ring, large arrows in 20) is surrounded by three ciliary wreaths (arrowheads) located on an overhang-
ing ve1um. Small arrow in (20) marks entrance to vestibulum. 22: Hydra with several trichodinids some of which were de-
tached by the preparation procedure, leaving characteristic pustules (arrow) produced by the proteinous denticles of the
holdfast organelle. 23: Frontal view showing the almost ring-shaped macronucleus. Arrow marks entrance to vestibulum.
AC = adoral ciliary spiral, CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus.
115

Peritrichia
Trichodina pediculus (24,25,21 ,28, from FOISSNER et al. 1992c, in vivo interference contrast micrographs of a popula-
tion from Hydra;26, from FOISSNER 1974, silver nitrate impregnation of a specimen from a young roach, Rutilus rutilus).
24-26:Posterior polar views showing outer ciliary wreath (arrow in24) and adhesive disc, which consists of 28-30 denti-
cles. 7-l I radial pins per denticle are recognizable. 27 ,28:. Adhesive disc of a post-divider showing resorbing parental denti-
cles (arrows). DE = denticles, pp = peripheral pins, RP = radial pins.
476

Peritrichia
Trichodina pedirzlus (fiom FOISSNER et al. 1992c.29-34, SEM micrographs). 29,31,33,34: Slightly contracted and oblique specimen
(29) atdexrended, bobbin-shaped cells (33, 34). The specimen in (33) is partially detached so that the pustule caused by the adhesive disc
can be seen (arrows in 31 and 33). Arrow in (34) denotes vestibular entrance. 30, 32: Aboral ciliary wreaths from anterior and posterior. AC
= adoral ciliary spiral, AD = adhesive disc, AW = outer (aboral) ciliary wreath, IC = inner ciliary wreath, LC = lateral ciliary wreath.
4ll

Peritrichia
Trichodina pediczlzs (fiom SCHNEIDER 1990. 35, 36, in vivo interf'erence contrast micrographs). 35: Heavily inf'ested tentacle of a hydra.
Second specimen from right shows typical bobbin-shape. 36: Holdfast organelle with ciliary wreaths and adhesive disc. Labelling of struc-
tures, see Figure24. AC = adoral ciliary spiral, CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus.
478

Peritrichia
'*
*t,
*.
&
it)I#i,
tr.
d'n.'{
t,.rt
+\
Irln
[u
t:
t,I
tä
a*.
lrrl
1!;,. ).L
bt,
Trichodina domerguei megamicronucleata (3843, fiom FOISSNER & JERSABECK, unpubl.; population fiom Lake Mondsee, Austria.
31,38,in vivo bright field micrographs; 39, methyl green-pyronin stain; 40, 42,43,in vivo interference contrast micrographs;41, silver ni-
trate impregnation). 37, 38: Trichodina domerguei megamicronucleata (small arrows in 37) is a specific epibiont of planktonic copepods
(e.g., Eudiaptomas) and easily distinguished fromT. pediculus, which is bobbin-shaped when attached to the host (Fig. l8), by its flat, coin-
like shape. Large arrow in (37) marks an epizoic colony of -+ Epistylis anastatica.39, 40: Nuclear apparatus. Arrows mark large micronu-
cleus, which did not stain with methyl green-pyronin. 41,43: The adhesive disc has 19 (range 19-22) denticles and an unstained centre;Tri-
chodina pediculr,r, in contrast, usually has 30 denticles and a darkly stained centre (Fig. 26). 42: Anterior polar view showing adoral ciliary
spiral and vestibular entrance (arrow). AC = adoral ciliary spiral, DE = denticles, pP = peripheral pins, RP = radial pins.
419

Peritrichia
P elagov ortic ella may eri GAURE-FREMrEr, r 920) JANKowsKr, 1 980
l92O Vorticella mayeri FAURE-FREMIET, Bull. Soc. zool. Fr., 45: 103.
1924 Vorticella mayeri FAURE-FREMIET - FAURE-FREMIET, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg., 6: 150 (detailed descrip-
tion).
1933 Vorticella mayeri FAURE-FREMIET 1902 - WANG & NIE, Contr. biol., Lab. Sci. Soc. China, 10: 65 (il-
lustrated record; incorrect date).
1935 Vorticella mayeri FAURE-FR., I92O - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 717 (revision).
1948 Vorticella mayeri FAURE-FREMIET 1920 - §nAuBf-HU§EK, Cas. närod. Mus., 117: l8l (illustrared
record).
l98O Pelagovorticella mayeri (FAURE-FREMIET, 1923) - JANKOWSKI, Trudy zool. Inst., Leningr., 94 116
(combining author; incorrect date).
1986 Vorticella mayeri FAURE-FREMIET, l92O -WARREN, Bull. Br. Mus. nat. Hist., 50: 3l (revision).
1992 Vorticella mayeri FAURE-FREMIET, l92O -FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberich-
te des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192: 118 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and eco-
logical monograph).
Taxonomy
Vorticella mayeri is type of Pelagovorticella IANKOWSKI, 1980, a genus not accepted by later authors (WAR-
REN 1986, FOISSNER 1988a, FOISSNER et al. 1992c). However, CLAMP's (1995) observation that Vorti-
cella natans (-+ Pelagovorticulla natans), another pelagic species, has a special life cycle supports a generic
separation. Redescription from silver-impregnated specimens necessary.
Differential diagnosis
1) Extended cells in vivo about 30-55 x 2545 pm, that is, Iength around 1.3 times width (Fig. 2).
2) Extended cells roughly pyriform, posterior portion, and thus also stalk, invariably curved dorsally, causing
stalk to be directed forward, that is, in swimming direction (Fi5.2,4-6). Contracted cells globular (Fig. 1, 3).
3) Macronucleus in transverse axis of cell, roughly horseshoe-shaped (Fig. 2, 4).
4) Contractile vacuole undemeath peristomial collar at ventral wall of vestibulum (Fig. 4, 6).
5) Pellicle with distinct, widely spaced transverse striae (Fig. 2-4). Number of striae not klown.
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar about as wide as broadest postoral body por-
tion. Peristomial disc flat, slightly raised in feeding specimens. Vestibulum of usual size (Fig. 2,4,5).
7) Stalk unbranched and smooth, contracts whip-like due to distinct myoneme, narrowed thread-like distally,
120-150 pm long, invariably extends in swimming direction (Fig. 1-6).
8) Solitary and planktonic, swims with stalk directed forward, occasionally using it like a giant flagellum (Fig.
1-6). Sessile stage not yet known.
Similar species
A distinct species easily recogntzed by the whip-like stalk, which,
+
unlike that of P . natans, neyer contracts helically, even not in pre-
served specimens (see Figure along side) . Vorticella species are at-
tached to various substrates (often cyanob acteria coenobia and dia-
toms) when planktonic (+ e.g. Vorticella chlorellata). + Astylo-
zoon is stalkless.3,,J, 8 are key characters for identification.
480

Peritrichia
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: In plankton of lakes, ponds, reservoirs, and large rivers. usually less common and
abundant than -+ P. natans. The locus classicus is near Orsay, France, where FAURE-FREMIET (1920) discovered
great numbers of P. mayeri in a farm pond. Later, he found it near Marcoussis (FAURE-FREMIET 1924). Further
records substantiated by illustrations: oligosaprobic to betamesosaprobic pond in Czechoslovakia (§nAUpX-
-HU§EK 1948); sporadically in the Amper River, the outlet of a Bavarian lake (FOISSNER et al. 1992c; Fig. 6);
rare in the Altmühlsee, Germany, during winter, together with -+ Astylozoonfaurei (Figtre on previous page); with
high abundance in a pool near Nanking University, China, during December (WANG & NIE 1933). Records not
substantiated by illustrations: reservoirs in Czechoslovakia (MORAVCOVÄ 1977); Hamburg harbour, Germany
(TENT 1981); plankton of Darube River and ox-bows in Hungary (NOSEK & BERECZKY 1981); summer plank-
ton of Po River, Italy (FERRARI et al. 1989); up to 2000 ind. l-t in the epilimnion of the monomictic Lake Kinneret,
Israel, during November (MADONI 1990, SHERR et al. 1991) and 13 000 ind. l-1 in February, during the period of
lake homothermy (HADAS & BERMAN 1998); up to 20 ind. crn2 (at 70 m) and 32ind. cm-2 (at 30 m) in the ben-
thic zone of an Italian reservoir in winter (MADONI 1989); Kuban River, mesotrophic reservoir, and eutrophic lake
in Russia, especially during suilrmer (KORNIYENKO 1972); during summer stagnation 11 ind. l-1 in a bay of Lake
Onega, Russia, polluted by pulp and paper mill sewage (MAZI{EIKAITE 1969); near Ames, Iowa, USA
(NOLAND & FINLEY 1931); Antarctic lake (LAYBOURN-PARRY etal.1997).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on bacteria. Biomass of 106 specimens about 50 mg
(FOISSNER et al. 1992c). Reliably recorded only from Eurasia. Euplanktonic in lakes, ponds, and reservoirs.
Throughout the year, probably preferring summer. Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et al.
(1992c): betamesosaprobic (b = 10,I = 5, SI =2.0).
CV
MA
_AC
\,
Pelagovorticella mayeri in vivo (1, 5, from WANG & NIE
1933; 2, 3,, from FAURE-FREMIET 1924;4, from §nA-
MEK-HU§EK ß48;6, from FOISSNER et al. 1992c). I,
3: Contracted specimens with thong-shaped stalk, 22 pm
(?), 40 !m.21 41 5: Extended specimens, 30-50 pm. Arrow
in (5) marks swimming direction. 6: Extended specimen
from the Amper River. Arrow marks contractile vacuole.
AC = adoral ciliary spiral, CV = contractile vacuole, FV =
food vacuole, MA = macronucleus, MY = stalk myoneme,
PC = peristomial collar, PD = peristomial disc, UM = un-
dulating membrane (haplokinety), V = vestibulum.
481

Peritrichia
P elagov ortic ella natans GAURE-FREMIET, 1924) JANKowsKI, 198s
1924 Vorticella convallariavar. natans FAURE-FREMIET, Bult. biol. Fr. Belg., 6: 149.
1933 Vorticella convallaria var. natans F.-FREM. - GAJEWSKAJA, Zoologica,32: 159 (illustrated record).
1935 Vorticella natans FAURE-FR., 1924 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 717 (revision).
1985 Pelagovorticella natans (FALIRE-FREMIET, 1923) - JANKOWSKI, Trudy zool. Inst., Lenin gr., 129: 96
(combining author; incorrect date).
1986 Vorticella natans FAURE-FREMIET, 1924-WARREN, Bull. Br. Mus. nat Hist., 50: 34 (revision).
l99l Vorticella natans FAURE-FREMIET, 1924 - PACKROFF & WILBERT, Arch. Protistenk., 140: 130 (il-
lustrated record).
1992 VOTIiCCIIA NATANS FAURE-FREMIET, 1924 _ FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, INfOrMAtiONSbEriCh-
te des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192: l2l ("Ciliate-Atlas", i.e., taxonomic and ecological
monograph).
Taxonomy
JANKOWSKI (1985) transferred V. natans to Pelagovorticella JANKOWSKI, 1980, which was not accepted by
WARREN (1986), FOISSNER (1988), and FOISSNER et al. (1992c). However, CLAMP (1995) provided some
evidence for a special life cycle of V. natans (see below), which might justify separation from Vorticella. Rede-
scription from silver-impregnated specimens necessary.
Differential diagnosis
I
1) Extended cells in vivo about 70-100 x 50-70 pm, that is, length 1-l.4 times width (Fig. 2, 11).
2) Extended cells campanulate, posterior portion, and thus also stalk, invariably curved dorsally, causing stalk to
be directed forward, that is, in swimming direction (Fig. 1, 2,6-12,22). Contracted specimens ovoid (Fig. 4,
t4,2t).
3) Macronucleus in longitudinal axis of cell, J-shaped (Fig.2,16,l1).
4) Contractile vacuole slightly underneath peristomial collar at ventral wall of vestibulum (Fig. 2, l2).
s) Pellicle with a total of about 95 rather distinct transverse striae (silverlines; Fig. 2,3,9,21): about 65 silverli-
nes from anterior end to anlage of aboral ciliary wreath and about 30 from there to stalk (n = 2).
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar slightly to very distinctly (brim-shaped) pro-
jecting beyond body proper. Peristomial disc usually flat to slightly concave, indistinctly raised in feeding
specimens. Vestibulum of usual size (Fig. 1,2,9-13,22,23).
7) Stalk unbranched and smooth, contracts helically due to distinct myoneme, more or less distinctly tapering
distally, up to 700 pm long, invariably extending in swimming direction (Fig. 1, 5,7,10,14,18-20,23,24).
8) Solitary and usually planktonic, swims with stalk directed forward (Fig. 1, 10, 14,22); sessile trophont stage
known but not yet described (CLAMP 1995).
Similar species
Shoutd not be confused with -r Pelagovorticella mayeri: 30-55 pm long, peristomial collar narrower than
broadest body site, macronucleus horseshoe-shaped and in transverse axis of cell, pellicular striation wide and
distinct, stalk only 120-150 pm long and not contracting helically but used as giant flagellum. Vorticella species
are attached to various substrates (often cyanobacteria coenobia and diatoms) when planktonic (-+ e.g. Vorti-
cella chlorellatq). -+ Astylozoon is stalkless. 3,7,8 are key characters for identification.
482

Peritrichia
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Very coflrmon in the plankton of ponds, lakes, reservoirs, outlets of lakes, and large
rivers, but rarely abundant. Locus classicus is a pond in France (FAURE-FREMßT 1924; Fig. 4, 5, 9). Further re-
cords substantiated by illustrations or micrographs: planktonic in a lowland river and in ponds near Hamburg, Ger-
many (KAHL 1935); in spring plankton of mesotrophic and eu- to polytrophic lakes of volcanic origin in Germany
(PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991); beta- to alphamesosaprobic Amper River, the outlet of Lake Ammersee in Ba-
varia, and a dystrophic lake in Upper Austria (FOISSNER et al. 1992c Fig. 10-18); small mesotrophic and hyper-
trophic lakes in Salzburg and Bavaria (Fig. 19-25); betamesosaprobic river in Czechoslovakia (§RAMEK-HUSEK
1948); with low abundance in shallow bays of Lake Baikal (GAJEWSKAJA 1933); USSR (GASSOVSKY 1960).
Records not substantiated by illustrations: eutrophic reservoir in Germany during April (BEUSCHOLD 1961); rare
in a mesotrophic lake of Germany (EHLERS 1965); Elbe River estuary, Germany (RIEDEL-LORJE 1981); with
low abundance in Lake Geneva, Switzerland, throughout the year (NAEF & MARTIN 1983, 1985, 1990,1993a,b);
fishpond in Poland (GRABACKA 1971); mesosaprobic sections of a Polish river (HLIL 1987); Ukrainian pond dur-
ing winter (KOVALCHUK & SVINTSOVA 1994); lake and reservoir in Armenia (ZHARIKOV 1983,
ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992);24 ind. 11 (May) and 40 ind. l-1 (September) in a betamesosaprobic reservoir and in
other reservoirs of the USSR (ALEKPEROV 1983, MAMAEVA 1976a, MYLNIKOVA 1992a); Douglas Lake and
shallow, eutrophic, monomictic man-made lake in the USA (CAIRNS & YONGUE 1966, SANDERS et al. 1989).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on bacteria and algae (Fig. 15-17). SANDERS et al.
(1989) estimated an ingestion rate of lll-1078 bacteria ind.-rh-r and a clearance rate of 42-187 nl ind.-'h-'. Bio-
mass of 106 specimens about 90 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1992c). Sr-ÄonÖBr & SLÄDEÖKOYA 0962) counted
200ind. l-1 in a Czechoslovakian reservoir at (n = 1) 8oC, pH6.9,11.6mglt Oz(97 qo sat.uration),5.9mg1-'
BODs, 3.5mgl-1 COzt"", 2.U0.6 German degrees totaVbicarbonate hardness,25mgl-l SO+3-, 7.8mgfr Cf,
1.1 mg l-r NO:-N, traces of ammonia. A brief description of the life cycle, which includes a sessile trophont, has
been provided by CLAMP (1995). Recorded from Eurasia only. Euplanktonic, according to our experience very
common in lakes, ponds, and reservoirs, but rarely abundant. Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et
al. (1992c): betamesosaprobic (o = 3, b = '7 ,I = 4, SI = 1.7).
AC + '
I $ r
'l-'r
PD
Pelagovofücellanatans(l-3,fromPACKROFF&WILBERT 1991;4,5,9,fromFAURE-FREMIET 1924 6,fromKAHL l935,redrawn
from FAURE-FREMIßT 192{7, 8, from SnÄfraff-gu§EK 1948. 1,2,4-9, in vivo; 3, silver nitrare impregnation). I,2,6-9: Swimming
specimens (70-100 pm) with extended or partially contracted (7, 8) stalk. KAHL (6) did not illustrate full length of stalk. Anow in (1) de-
notes swimming direction. 3: Detail of transversely striated silverline system. 4: Contracted specimen with contracted stalk not completely
shown. 5: Narrowed posterior portion of stalk. AC = adoral ciliary spiral, CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus, MY = myoneme,
p(
= peristomial collar, PD = peristomial disc, UM = undulating membrane.
483

Peritrichia
_ :... _ . jja j_ j j.j j:ttt_t::iL::_tj::r_:rj-.j._._ _:_.
:-..:-:a-:1t-:.:-:t-::t-r-:.t-:t:-:a-ta-:a-:-t-:l-ta-t::-tl-t::-t::-:::-::t-::tl:.:::-:::,::,t:..:..:. ::-:::- ::-:-:::-:-:-.-:t-.- .|1.N
i:1:|i.:11t1t:t:i:t,:,;:1::t:t::;::t::;::,,:t:l:':'1::::1:t;::,:111y;fffUäattttitititittittr,ittittittllitiill:i:ir,;,;,t:';,:1,6
,,,,,,,,,,,,,.,-,-,-,,-,,,-,,, ::!Wlj|
1*
:fiI|fi
,,
il.tT..
1S
Pelagovorticellanatans(lO-18, tiomFOISSNERetal. 1992i; l0-l3,populationtiomAmperRiver; l4-l8,populationfromdystrophic
lake [Ibmer See] in Upper Austria. 10-14, in vivo bright field micrographs; 15, 18, in vivo interference contrast micrographs; 16, 17, methyl
green-pyronin stains). 10-13: Extended specimens laterally (10-12) and ventrally (13). Note that cells are curved by about 180o relative to
main stalk axis. Arrow in (1 1) marks vestibular entrance. 14: Contracting specimen. The distal third of the stalk is acontractile. 15: Freely
motile and feeding specimen. The cell is packed with food vacuoles containing small, phnktonic algae (cp. Fig. 16, 17). 16, 17: J-shaped
macronucleus. L8: Distal portion of stalk. Arrow marks myoneme. AC = adoral ciliary spirat, CV = contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuole
with algae, MA = macronucleus, PC = peristomial collar, ST = stalk.
484

Peritrichia
AC+UM
1
.-§T
*,?w)Mril.r%'
2g
Pelagovofücella natans (19-25, originals of populations flom a lake [Höglwörther See] in Bavaria and a lake [Wallersee; 22] in Salzburg.
lgJl, 24, 25, SEM micrographs; 22, in vivo interference conffast micrograph; 23, protargol impregnation). l9:2L,24,25: Contracted
specimens with proximal portion of stalk helically contmcted. Different portions of the stalk are able to contract individually. Arrow in (21)
marks area with removed cell membrane to show transverse cortical striae (25). 22: Extended, freely motile specimen. Arrow shows swim-
ming direction. 23:. Oral ciliature and myoneme system. AC = adoral ciliary spiral, AW = anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, MY = myoneme
system (contractile fibres), ST = stalk with myoneme, UM = undulating membrane.
485

Peritrichia
V ortic ella aquadulcls complex
1887 Vorticella aqua-dulcis STOKES, Proc. Am. phil. Soc., 24:249 (-+ Fig. 2).
I88l Vorticella platysoma STOKES, Proc. Am. phil. Soc., 24:249 (-+ Fig. l).
l93l Vorticella striata DUJARDIN 1841 var. octava (STOKES 1885) - NOLAND & FINLEY, Trans. Am. mi-
crosc. Soc., 50: 109 (taxonomy; redescription from life and morphometric characterization).
l93l Vorticella kahlii STILLER, Arb. ung. biol. Forschlnst., 4: 181 (-+ Fig.4; transferred to Haplocaulusby
SOMMER 1951).
1935 Vorticella kahli STILLER, l93l (-+ Fig. 3), V. platysoma STOKES, 1887, y. octava STOKES, 1885, and
V. aqua-dulcis STOKES, 1887 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: '726,721 (revision).
1942 Vorticella octava STOKES - STILLER, Arch. Hydrobiol., 38: 399 (illustrated record).
l95l Vorticella latestiata SOMMER (-+ Fig. 7) and V. octava f . costata SOMMER (-+ Fig. 6), Arch. Hydro-
biol.,44:386, 388.
1979 Vorticella costata SOMMER, 1951 and V. platysoma STOKES, 1887 (-+ Fig. 9-11) - FOISSNER,ZooI.
Jb. Syst., 106: 538, 543 (morphometric characteization and silverline system).
1989 Vorticellaplatysoma STOKES, 1887-SONG&WILBERT,Lauterbomia,3:l2O (-+Fig.5,8,12,13).
1992 Vorticella aquadulcis-Komplex - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer.
Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192:59 ("Ciliate-Atlas", i.e., taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
Following NOLAND & FINLEY (1931) and KAHL (1935), small (mostly <50;rm) vorticellas with widely
spaced pellicle striae have been identified as V. octqva STOKES, 1885. However, this is incorrect because
STOKES (1885) emphasized a fine and niurow pellicle striation in this species. The population of NOLAND &
FINLEY (1931) matches V. aquadulcis, V. octava sensu KAHL (1935), STILLER (1942a), and BERNERTH
(1982), as well as some other (synonymous?) species which were classified as "V. aquadulcis complex" by
FOISSNER et al. (1992c). Furthermore, this complex comprises Vorticella stiata DUJARDIN (marine) andV.
astylifurmis FOISSNER (terrestrial and often vagile, very many pellicle pores).
Vorticella aquadulcishas been thoroughly reviewed by FOISSNER et al. (1992c).Here, we emphasize epiplank-
tonic populations, which have rarely been studied in detail. Thus, we reinvestigated such a population because
further research might prove that epiplanktonic I/. aquadulcis populations belong to a distinct species, possibly
even to the genus Haplocaulus
Description of an epiplanktonic population of the. Vorticella aquadulcis complex, possibly V. platysoma
STOKES, 1887 (Fig. 14-21 and Table): Extended specimens pyriform (Fig. 17-19). Macronucleus highly vari-
able, that is, ellipsoidal, reniform or almost semicircular (Fig. 14, 19). Contractile vacuole at ventral wall of ves-
tibulum. Pellicle coarsely striated (Fig. 19,22,25, Table). Myonemes strongly developed (Fig. 14-16,23,24,
Table). Adoral ciliary spiral describes I V+ tums on peristomial disc, cilia about 10 pm long, vestibulum short,
containing only V+ turn of adoral spiral; peniculus 3 very likely composed of 2 basal body rows only; epistomial
membrane consists of about 3 basal bodies only (Fig. 14,15). Stalk usually slightly shorter than body, very likely
contracts helically (not unambiguously recognizable due to its shortness), about 1.5 pm across (Fig. 14, 16-19,
25, 26, Table). Usually only a single specimen attached to one diatom colony (Fragilaria, Tabellaria, Aste-
rionella; Fig. 14, 18,25), rarely (2 7o) two.
Table: Morphometric data from Vorticella platysoma, a species of the Vorticella aquadulcis complex. Upper line, original data from Lake
Mondsee population; lower line, SONG & WILBERT (1989) population from a pond in Germany.
Characterl Method2 Mean M SD CV Min Max n
Body, length IV 21 .9 28 2.8 10.0 24 32 15
IV 15 22 9
Body, width IV 20.5 20 2.6 t2.l 18 26 15
486

Peritrichia
Characterr Method2 Mean M SD CV Min Max n
Stalk, length IV 19.5 22 6.6 33.8 10 24 4
Cell, length without stalk P 17 .7 18 2.0 tt.4 15 2t 18
Cell, length with stalk P 22.4 22 3.5 15.6 t7 30 18
l
Main myonemes, number in oral view P 7.3 0.9 12.4 6 9 l1
Main myonemes, number in aboral view P 14.8 15 2.0 13.8 t2 t1 10
Silverlines from anterior end to aboral DN t7.6 t1 0.9 5.1 t6 t9 26
ciliary wreath, number DN t3.6 t3 t6 9
l
Silverlines from aboral ciliary wreath to DN 5.8 6 0.8 l 3.8 5 t3
scopula, number DN 6.6 6 7 9
' Data from field specimens. Measurements in micrometres. CV = coefficient of variation in Vo, M = median, Max = maximum, Mean =
arithmetic mean, Min = minimum, n = number of specimens investigated, SD = standard deviation, SE = standard error of mean.
,
DN = dry silver nitrate impregnation, IV = in vivo, P = protargol impregnation.
D i f f e re n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (includes present data and those mentioned in FOISSNER et al. 1992c)
1) Extended cells in vivo 15-55 x 10-35 pm, usually about 35 x 20 pm, that is, length about 1.75 times width
(Fig. l, 2,8, 10, t7).
2) Extended cells pyriform (Fig. 1-10, 17-19). Contracted specimens roughly ovoid (Fig. 11,25).
3) Macronucleus in transverse axis of cell, reniform to semicircular (Fig. 3, 5, 8, g,14, 16, 19,20). I
4) Contractile vacuole distinctly undemeath peristomial collar at ventral wall of vestibulum (Fig. 5, 6, 8, 9).
5) Pelliclewithatotalof about24coase transversestriae(silverlines;Fig. 1-10, 13,219,2,25): 13-30(mean
= 19, n = 100, 6 populations) silverlines from anterior end to anlage of aboral ciliary wreath and 3J (mean =
5, n = 78, 5 populations) from aboral ciliary wreath to stalk.
6) Qral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar 13-,26 pmin diameter, that is, usually not pro-
jecting body proper. Peristomial disc almost flat and slightly obliquely raised in feeding specimens. Vestibu-
lum inconspicuous, about 1/3 of body length (Fig. 1-10, l8). Adoral ciliary spiral and undulating membrane
(haplokinety) describe about 1 t/a ttrns on peristomial disc before plunging into the vestibulum, accomplish-
ing only a further t/q tum ( Fig. 8, 14, 15, 23).
7) Stalk unbranched and smooth, contracts helically due to distinct myoneme, 24 ym across, 10-300 pm long,
in epiplanktonic populations usually about as long as body (Fig. l-:7 , 14, 11 , 18,25).
8) Solitary and sessile on a wide range ofbenthic and planktonic substrates (+ ecology).
Similar species
Rather easy to identify due to the small size and coarse pellicle striation. Species of other Vorticella complexes
(V. infusionurz complex, V. octava complex, V. microstoma complex, V. convallaria complex) are larger (usually
>35 pm long), have more than 30 silverlines (pellicular striae) between anterior end and scopula, and are usually
not epiplanktonic (detailed descriptions, see FOISSNER et al. 1992c)..Conversely, separation of distinct species
within the complex is not yet possible, if at all (-+ taxonomy). -+ Vorticella vernalis, a species also frequently
attached to planktonic algae, is larger (about 50 pm), has a J-shaped macronucleus, 2 contractile vacuoles, a total
of about 65 silverlines, and a longer stalk (80-280 ,pm). Haplocaulus epizoicas (§RÄIUEK-HUSEK) has a nar-
rowly striated pellicle and the stalk contracts in zigzag, as in 11. fluviatilis SHUBERNETSKIJ & CHORIK,
whose peristomial disc is umbilicate (WARREN 1988). Pseudohaplocaulus (-+ P. infravacuolatus) has a tuber-
culate pellicle and the stalk contracts in zigzag. 1,3, 5,7 are key characters for identification.
481

Peritrichia
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: A common benthic, epizoic (e.g. on Baetis) and epiplanktonic species in slightly
to moderately polluted stagnant and running waters (BERNERTH 1982, HAMMANN 1952, SCHÖDEL 1987,
SOMMER 1951, STILLER 1960). STOKES (1887b) discovered V. aquadulcis ardV. platysoma in a pond at-
tached to Lemna, respectively, algae, probably near Trenton, New Jersey, USA. Further records substantiated by
illustrations: on Fragilaria, Asterionella, and Tabellaria in the mesotrophic Lake Mondsee, Austria, during
autumn (Fig. 14-27 and Table); scattered on mosses of a clean, alpine brook in Austria (FOISSNER 1979b); on a
pelagic rotifer and on pelagic algae in a Utricularia pond near Hamburg, Germany (KAHL 1935); moderately
abundant on algae of a eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Germany from January to early April (SONG
& WILBERT 1989); ephemeral humic soda pond in Hungary (STILLER 1942a); sometimes very abundant on
Leptodora kindtii and Daphnia longispina var. hyalina in Lake Balaton, Hungary, during summer (STILLER
1931a); attached to Enteromorpha and Cladophora in a German lake (Großer Plöner See) during September
(SOMMER l95l); on Lemna and other aquatic plants in Argentina (CLAPS & MODENUTTI 1984).
Records not documented by illustrations and records of small, unidentified vorticellas attached to pelagic
diatoms: pelagial of the eutrophic RJmov Reservoir, Czech Republic, during August and September (MACEK et
al. 1996);413 ind. l-' (annual mean) in 0-20 m of Lake Constance, Germany (MÜLLER 1989; designated as
"Vorticella on diatoms"; size class 120-35 pml and volume [10000 pm3] of protargol-impregnated specimens
match the V. aquadulcis complex; SCHWEIZER 1994 probably found the same species in Lake Constance at-
tached to Fragilaria crotonensis and Asterionella formosa); at 34 m in a German lake (Großer Plöner See), at-
tached to Fragilaria crotonensis (SOMMER 1951); on exposed slides of German bog lakes (STRÜDER-
-KYPKE 1996); very abundant (7500 ind. cm-2) on an exposed slide near the surface of a non-aerated, peptone-
enriched aquarium filled with freshwater from a pond in Bonn, Germany (BICK & SCHMERENBECK 1971;
these data indicate a species of theVorticella infusionura complex); 32ind. cm-2 in an alphamesosaprobic section
of an Italian river (MADONI 1979); from April to November up to 400 ind. l-1 in Chilean lakes attached to pe-
lagic diatoms of the MelosiralAulacoseira group (WÖLFL 1996; as Vorticella spp., 14-28 pm in diameter).
Several records from activated sludge plants (e.g., KLIMOWICZ 1910,1912,1973, MADONI & GHETTI 1981,
STAMM 1984, SYDENHAM 1971) and trickling filters (CURDS & COCKBURN 1970a, MT 1968).
ALBRECHT (1986) clässified a species of the complex as holo-euryhaline because he found it in the salt-
polluted, betamesosaprobic Weser River system. RIEDEL-LORJE (1931) and TENT (1981) recorded it from the
Elbe River estuary (Germany). Several records from terrestrial habitats (e.g., BLATTERER & FOISSNER 1988,
FOISSNER 1987a,1998).
Autecological data: Species of the Y. aquadulcis complex feed mainly on bacteria, according to HAMMANN
(1952) also on chlamydomonads and a Protococcus-like algae. Biomass of 106 live specimens about 12-15 mg
(FOISSNER et al. 1992c, MACEK et al. 1996), of 106 Lugol-formalin-fixed specimens on average 8.9 mg (MA-
CEK et al. 1996). §fUBf et al. (1996) estimated ayerage (+ SD) grazing rates of 4200 + 3800 bacteria ind.-l h-1
and 560 + 630 cyanobacteria ind.-rh-r corresponding to clearance rates of l24O nl ind.-'h-r for bacteria and
3150 nl ind. 1 !1 for cyanobacteria; proportion of ingested algae >2pmwas 3 Vo. Average growth rate 0.75 d-t,
SD = 0.42 d ' (MACEK et al. 1996). The unidentified population from Lake Constance had a göneration time of
abott 49 h at 8.5o C and a potential production (annual mean) of 2.1 mm3 m-3 d ' (MÜLLER 1989). BERNERTH
(1982) counted up to 15 ind. cm-2 in the cooling system of a conventional power station at following conditions
(n = 32): betamesosaprobic, 12.5-32.5" C, pH 7.1-8.5, 395-1120 pS cm-l specific conductivity, 3.5-8.8 mg It
Oz,7 to 2O mgl't DOC, 12 000-180 000 bacteria mlr (plate method). According to STILLER (1946, 1960), the
oxygen demand is rather low; she found a species'of the complex even in a hot, brackish, hydrogen sulphide-rich
sulphur spring near Split, Croatia. Rather insensitive to large changes of temperature and pH.
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Eurasia, South America, and Australia, and from dead and living
substrates and a great variety of habitats, including soil. Benthic and epiplanktonic. During all seasons, that is,
eurythermic and very likely holo-euryhaline. Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et al. (1992c): be-
tamesosaprobic to alphamesosaprobic (o =2, b = 5, a =3,I=2,5I=2.1).
488

Peritrichia
C+UM
C
V
A
V
MA
AC AW
15
Vorticella aquadulcis complex; names of species, see list of synonyms (1, 2, from STOKES 1887b; 3, from KAHL 1935; 4, from STILLER
l93la; 5,8, 12, 13, from SONG & WILBERT 1989; 6,7, from SOMMER 1951; 9-11, from FOISSNER 1919b; 14-16, originals. l-12, in
vivo; 13-16, silver impregnation). L-10: Extended specimens, 15*55 pm, usually about 35 pm long. Note coarse striation of pellicle. 11:
Contracted specimen. 12: Swarmer. 13: Silverline system. 14-16: Oral and somatic ciliature, macronucleus, and contractile apparatus (myo-
nemes) in contracted specimens. Arrow in (15) marks tiny epistomial membrane, arrowhead denotes peniculus 3. AC = adoral ciliary spiral,
AW = anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, CV = contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuoles, MA = macronucleus, MY = myonemes, PC = peristo-
mial collar, PD = peristomial disc, S = scopula (stalk attachment site), UM = undulating membrane, V = vestibulum.
489

Peritrichia
'ffi
1§,';,ffi
-MY
ffi
,.i;, ',,i',
',tti: :i: 'i:
Wffi. 'a 22
..&.'w|..,;&.1,r""''"
lw
r M ',&#/ H. i& #. ',, W
27
Vofücellaaquadzlciscomplex(oliginalsli'onrapopulationattachedtoF'rugiluriu inLakeMor.rdsee,Austria. 17 20,it'tvivo;21,25,26,scan-
ning electron micrographs; 22, sllver nitrate impregnation; 23,24,21, protargol impregnation). 17-19: Extended specimens showing pyriform
shape, coarse pellicle striation, ellipsoidal macronucleus, and short stalk. Arrow in (19) denotes anlage ofaboral ciliary wreath.20: Squeezed
specimen showing macronucleus. 21,25,26: Anterior polar view (asterisk marks contracted oral opening), lateral view, and oblique posterior
polar view of contracted specimens. Note coarse pellicle striation and short, helically contracted stalk. 22: Silverline system. 23,24,27:
Strongly developed contractile apparatus (myoneme system) in anterior polar, posterior polar and lateral view (cp. Figures l,[-16). AC = ado-
ral ciliary spiral, AW = anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, MA = macronucleus, MY = myonemes, S = scopula (stalk attachment site).
490

Peritrichia
V ortic ella chlorellala srnLBR, t s+o
1940 Vorticella chlorellata STILLER, Arch. Hydrobiol., 36: 281.
l9ll Vorticella chlorellata STILLER - STILLER, Fauna Hung., 105: 145 (revision in Hungarian language).
1996 Vorticella chlorellata STILLER, 1940 - FOISSNER & BROZEK, Int. Rev. ges. Hydrobiol., 81: 341 (de-
tailed redescription from life and after silver impregnation).
Taxonomy
WARREN (1986) synonymized V. chlorellata with Y. chlorostigma (EHRENBERG) which is, however, a dis-
tinct species (FOISSNER & BROZEK 1996; -s similar species).
Dilierential diagnosis
1) Extended cells in vivo 44-64 x 3448 pm, on average 53 x 40;rm, that is, length about 1.3 times width (Fig.
1,2,8).
2) Extended cells urceolate to pyriform-campanulate (Fig. 1, 2,6*8). Contracted specimens globular (Fig. ).
3) Macronucleus in longitudinal axis of cell, J-shaped (Fig.6,8).
4) Contractile vacuole at mid-ventral portion of vestibulum, that is, distinctly underneath peristomial collar (Fig.
6).
,
s) Cells packed with symbiotic green algae 5-6 pm across in vivo (Fig. 1-4, 6-9). Pellicle with a total of about
60 distinct transverse striae (silverlines; Fig. 5, 6, 10, l2): 3540 (mean = 39) silverlines from anterior end to
anlage of aboral ciliary wreath and 19-24 (mean = 2l) from aboral ciliary wreath to stalk.
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar distinctly projecting beyond body proper. Peri-
stomial disc slightly convex and raised in feeding specimens. Vestibulum large, in feeding specimens
obliquely extending to body centre (Fig. 2, 6, 1). Adoral ciliary spiral and undulating membrane
(haplokinety) describe 1.5 tums on peristomial disc before plunging into the vestibulum, accomplishing a fur-
ther tum (Fig. 6, I l).
1) Stalk unbranched and smooth, contracts helically due to distinct myoneme, 3-4 pm across, up to 20 times,
usually 3-10 times as long as body, attached to cyanobacterial coenobia (Fig. 1,6).
8) Solitaryandsessileonplanktoniccoenobiaof cyanobacteria(Fig. l,2andFig. I by -+Pseudohaplocaulus
infravacuolatus).
Similar species
Vorticella chlorellata is easy.to identify because it is (as yet) the sole green epiplanktonicVorticella species.
Vorticella chlorostigma (EHRENBERG), which is also green due to symbiotic algae, lives on solid substrates
(e.g. roots of water plants, blades of grass), is distinctly larger (100 x 70 pm), and has a horseshoe-shaped
macronucleus in the transverse axis of the cell (FOISSNER & BROZEK 1996). Pseudohaplocaulus spp. and
other peritrichs, which also colonize planktonic cyanobacteria, lack symbiotic green algae (-+ Pseudohaplo-
caulus infravacuolatus). 1,3,5 (with symbiotic green algae), 8 (epiplanktonic) are key characters for identifi-
cation.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Locus classicus is a lake (Großer Plöner See) in northern Germany, where STIL-
LER (1940) discovered V. chlorellata on planktonic coenobia of the cyanobacterium Gloeotrichia sp. FOISS-
491

Peritrichia
NER & BROZEK (1996) found it together with -+ Pseudohaplocaulus infravacuolatus in a shallow, eutrophic
lake (Grabensee) in Salzburg, Austria, attached to planktonic coenobia of Anabaena sp. in early November.
PRATT & ROSEN (1983) found a greenVorticella attached to planktonic Anabaenaflos-aquae, Microcystis ae-
ruginosa, Botryococcus braunii, Lyngbya birgei, and Tabellaria fenestrata in a mesotrophic hard-water lake
(Douglas Lake) of Michigan, USA. They identified it as Vorticella margaritata yar. chlorelligera, now Pseudo-
vorticella fasciculata (MÜLLER) FOISSNER & BROZEK. Unforrunarely, PRATT & ROSEN (1983) did not
provide morphological details, and thus their identification cannot be confirmed or rejected. FOISSNER & BRO-
ZEK (1996) suggested that it might have been Vorticella chlorellata, as indicated by the habitat.
Autecological data and ecblogical summary: Probably feeds mainly on bacteria. Biomass of 106 specimens
about 25 mg (our calculations). Possibly not as ra-re as indicated by the sparse literature data because very likely
sometimes confused withVorticella chlorostigma or rrot identified to species level. Probably an obligate epibiont
preferring planktonic coenobia of cyanobacteria.
iiiii::.,,iii!:illiiii:i"\
,,',',r..r.r#r,,,ta ',r*rr.:r,
::)t:::ltl)Lt::l:::. ::::t:
:l
::::;:,ii:;:li::;t:t t:t:::t:
liiliiii:iil iiiii;:l'ii:i::
Vorticella chlorellata (fiom FOISSNER & BROZEK 1996. l-3, in vivo bright field micrographs; 4, protargol impregnation;
5, in vivo interference contrast micrograph). 1, 2: Representative specimens attached to Anabaena coenobia. Arrow in (2)
marks entrance to vestibulum. Note that cells are green due to symbiotic algae. 3, 4: The cells contain many globular, 5-6
pm-sized symbiotic algae, which impregnate with protargol (4). The symbionts have a green chloroplast and a distinct pyre-
noid, indicating that they belong to Chlorella.5: Narrowly striated pellicle with transverse striae. AW = anlage of aboral
ciliary wreath, SA = symbiotic green algae.
492

Peritrichia
AC
-!
cv_
MA_
sA_
AW_
AW
,t\\\
ST
MY
F-.
t-,
f--,.,
t r .- .
-
6 t.
F.-
ffi,
F-
10
12
Vorticella chlnrellatn (6, 9-12, from FOISSNER & BROZEK 1996; 7, 8, from STILLER 1940. 6- 10, in vivo; I I , protargol
impregnation; 12, silver nitrate impregnation). 6-8: Representative specimens filled with symbiotic green algae, 56 pm,
55-60 pm. 9: Symbiotic green alga with bowl-shaped chloroplast and distinct pyrenoid, diameter about 5 pm. 10, l2:, Detail
ofpellicle and silverline system. Vorticella chlorellata has a total ofabout 60 transverse striae. respectively, silverlines. ll:
Frontal view of oral and somatic ciliary pattern of a swarmer. Long arrow marks epistomial membrane, a short row of cili-
ated basal bodies with unknown function, at vestibular entrance. Short arrow denotes contracted peristomial opening. AC =
adoral ciliary spiral, AW = anlage of (6, 12) and fully developed (l l) aboral ciliary wreath, CV = contractile vacuole at ven-
tral wall of vestibulum, MA = macronucleus, MY = myonemes in stalk (6) and body (11), PC = peristomial collar, PD =
peristomial disc, SA = symbiotic green algae, ST = stalk, UM = undulating membrane (haplokinety), V = vestibulum.
493

Peritrichia
Vorticella vernülis sroKES. 1887
1887 Vorticella vernalis STOKES, Am. mon. microsc. J., 8: 145.
1922 Vorticella appuntata FROMMENTEL 1874 - PENARD, Etudes Infusoires, p.252 (incorrect subsequent
spelling of species and author name; misidentification).
1935 Vorticella vernalis STOKES, 1887 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 730 (revision).
1986 Vorticella vernalis STOKES, 1887 - WARREN, Bull. Br. Mus. nat. Hist., 50: 45 (revision).
Taxonomy
Vorticella vernalis has not. been redescribed since the original description. Our epiphytoplanktonic population
(Fie. 2-5 , 1 , 9-33, Table) from Lake Mondsee, Austria, matches the original description very well (Fig. 6), espe-
cially with regard to size, contractile vacuoles, pellicular blisters, and nuclear apparatus. We are thus rather sure
of the identification, although STOKES (1887c), unfortunately, did not provide details about the habitat.
D i f f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (detailed morphometric data, see Table below)
1) Extendedcellsinvivo40-56x2O44pm,onaverage45x35pm,thatis, lengthaboutl.3timeswidth(Fig.
6, 14, Table).
2) Extended cells slightly to distinctly campanulate (Fig. 5-8, 13-11). Conffacted specimens globular (Fig. 2a, 30).
3) Macronucleus in longitudinal axis of cell, roughly C- to J-shaped (Fig. 2a,b,6-8).
4) Two contractile vacuoles slightly underneath peristomial collar at ventral wall of vestibulum (Fig. G-8).
5) Pellicle with few to numerous blisters, which often are more distinct in stressed or dying specimens (Fi9.6,1,
9,11 ,18); contains a total of about 65 transverse striae (silverlines; Fig. 7,29-33, Table): 3646 (mean= 4l)
silverlines from anterior end to anlage of aboral ciliary wreath and 20-2'7 (mean = 24) from aboral ciliary
wreath to stalk.
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar distinctly projecting beyond body proper and
thus often undulated in protargol-impregnated cells (Fig. 10). Peristomial disc almost flat and slightly raised
in feeding specimens. Vestibulum moderately large, obliquely extending to body centre in feeding specimens
(Fig. 7, 8, 13). Adoral ciliary spiral and undulating membrane (haplokinety) comparatively long, describe
about 2 turns on peristomial disc before plunging into vestibulum, accomplishing a further turn (Fig. 10, 1 1,
23-26). Peniculus 3 forms distinct hump with proximal end of peniculus 2 (Fig. 3, 4,23). Epistomial mem-
brane consists of 3-4 basal bodies at entrance of vestibulum (Fig. I l, 25,26).
7) Stalk unbranched and smooth, contracts helically due to distinct myoneme covered with refractile granules
(granules, however, less conspicuous than inVorticella pictat),4-5 pm across and up to 7 times body length
(Fig. 2a, 5, 13-11, 19, 20, 21, 28).
8) Solitary and sessile on various substrates, planktonic populations usually attached to diatom colonies (Fig. 5,
t3-17 ,2',7 ,30).
Table: Morphometric data from Vorticella vernalis (population from Lake Mondsee, Austria).
Characterr Method2 Mean M SD SE, CV Min Max n
Body, length IV 45.7 45 4.8 1.0 t0.4 40 56 23
Body, width at peristomial IV 35.6 36 4.5 t.2 t2.l 26 44 t4
collar
Body, maximum width under- IV 27 .l 26 5.3 1.1 19.4 20 44 23
neath peristomial collar
494

Peritrichia
Characterr Method2 Mean M SD SE CV Min Max n
Stalk, length IV 180.0 t93 7 6.7 21 .t 42.6 80 280 8
Cell, length without stalk P 24.8 25 2.2 0.5 9.0 2l 30 19
Cell, length with stalk P 52.8 50 20.8 4.8 39.1 30 t25 I9
Silverlines from anterior end to DN 41 .L 4t 2.6 0.1 6.4 36 46 53
aboral ciliary wreath, number
Silverlines from aboral ciliary DN 23.7 24 2.1 0.3 9.0 20 2l 53
wreath to scopula, number
I
Data from field specimens. Measurements in micrometres. CV = coefficient of variation in Vo, M = median, Max = maximum, Mean =
arithmetic mean, Min = minimum, n = number of specimens investigated, SD = standard deviation, SE = standard error of mean.
,
DN = dry silver nitrate impregnation, IV = in vivo, P = protargol impregnation.
Similar species
Difficult to distinguish fromVorticella picta, which has a very similar size, shape, nuclear apparatus, and number
of contractile vacuoles and silverlines. However,V. picta (Fig. 1a-g; detailed description in FOISSNER et al.
1992c, p. l0l) differs from 7. yernalis in three important features: the stalk granules are more distinct, that is,
like sulphur granules of sulphur bacteria; it lacks pellicular blisters; and the location of the contractile vacuoles is
different, that is, one each at ventral and dorsal wall of the vestibulum. Vorticella bivacuolum SONG & WIL-
BERT, 1989 is, like 7. vernalis, attached to algae and has 2 contractile vacuoles, but is smaller (25-35pm in
life), has only 13-17 (mean about 15) silverlines from aboral ciliary wreath to stalk, and lacks cortical blisters.
Vorticella hyalina STILLER, 1940, which was found by SOMMER (1951) on planktonic diatoms (Aulacoseira
islandica helvetica, Stephanodiscus astrea) and Cladophora, has only I contractile vacuole and lacks conical
blisters. Species of the --> Vorticella aquadulcis complex, also often epiplanktonic, are smaller (on average
35 x 20 pm) and have a reniform to semicircular macronucleus in transverse axis of cell, only 1 contractile vacu-
ole, and a total of only about 24 silverlines; in our material, V. aquadulcis and 7. vernalis were readily distin-
guishable by the length of the stalk, viz. about as long as body in the former and seven times as long as body in
the latter. Species of the y. convallaria complex (detailed description, see FOISSNER et al. 1992c,p.84) are, in
vivo, also very similar toV. vernalis, but have only 1 contractile vacuole and distinctly more silverlines (about
100 vs. 65). The pellicular blisters of V. vernalis are reminiscent of the pellicular tubercles of Pseudovorticella
species, which have, however, a reticulate silverline system. 3,4,5,7 arekey characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Not very common. Attached to benthic and planktonic substrates in ponds and
lakes. STOKES ( 1 887c) discovered V . vernalis during early spring in a pond in the USA, probably near Trenton,
New Jersey, where he lived and worked; unfortunately, he did not mention the substrate. PENARD (1922) found
it on Stephanoceros, a rotifer attached to macrophytes. We found V. vernalis in the pelagial of the mesotrophic
Lake Mondsee, Upper Austria, during late October (Fig.2-33, Table), attached exclusively to Fragilaria colo-
nies, although other diatoms were present. Swiss limnologists observed a "V. convallaria on Fragilaria" in vari-
ous lakes, indicating that they were dealing with V. vernalis (THOMAS 1964). M'ÜLLER (1989) counted
94 ind.l-l of a "Vorticella on diatoms" in Lake Constance, Germany; size class (35-50 pm) of Lugol-fixed indi-
viduals and biovolume (37000 pm3; shrinkage only about l0 Vo) of protargol-impregnated specimens match 7.
vernalis (further data, see autecology).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Probably feeds on small algae and bacteria. Biomass of 106 speci-
mens about 40 mg (our calculations). Generation time of the unidentified population from Lake Constance men-
tioned above about 75 h at 8.5o C (MÜLLER 1989). Reliably recorded from Europe and North America only.
Epibiontic; epiphytoplanktonic populations possibly confined to diatoms, especially Fragilaria.
495

Peritrichia
\
Vorticellapicta (tiom FOISSNER et al. 1992c. la-f, in vivo bright field micrographs; lg, in vivo intert'erence contrast micrograph). la-g:
Extended specimens, contracted cell (f), and details of stalk (d, g). Note thatV. picta has, like V. vernalis, two contractile vacuoles, however,
one each at the ventral and dorsal wall of the vestibulum (b). A further main difference concems the stalk granules, which are much more
distinct in V. pictathaninV. vernalis, making the stalk look like a long sulphur bacterium. Arrows in (lc) mark margins of vestibular en-
trance. CV = conhactile vacuoles, FV = food vacuole, MA = macronucleus.
,i!!3i':'
-P E 3
r'iit";':"t'.:.t:.
'#t*::iffi
,'!r'-.p 'i
t 3
PE3-
jlj.raa r'a aa ,$o1 a:a .l ).a f' aaal-r .:, '.;j,ü::'.'.x.,::,..: : : : : ; ::: I t[ . afl ;:§, ,.
i : .
aa 4-ttt: r taJ
aa
Vorticella vernalis after protargol impregnation (originals of an epiphytoplanktonic population from Lake Mondsee, Austria). 2a, b: Nuclear
apparatus. 3, 4: Proximal (vestibular) portion of oral ciliature in two different views showing arrangement of peniculi 1-3. Peniculus 3,
which is composed of two short rows and one long row of basal bodies, forms a conspicuous hump with the proximal end of peniculus 2 (cp.
Figure 23). DI = diatom (Fragilaria), MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, MY = myoneme in peristomial cöllar (contractile fibres),
PEl-3 = peniculi (adoral membranelles), ST = stalk myoneme.
496

Peritrichia
milifiMin
ttttttWtr
V
PC
cv-
1v\ !a.l
;il
I
AW- r' j
'l i' r l' '.t'
) )\t att t rrl L ...,-,,,d
tt l a -- I
\lr rltrri rttl r t r i I rl ti I Itlifttrtrrlllitr
:\ tt,,. rttrrr
j "rt'ttr
a!
-MY
\
\
\
\
\
:-AW
-e
J
-
ttl
12
impregnation). 5: Specimen with long stalk attached lo Frogilaria.6-8: Extended specimens,45-55 pm. Arrows in (6) denote the two con-
tractile vacuoles, those in (7) mark pellicular blisters giving cells punctate appearance (6). 9: Pellicle striation and blisters. 10: Oral and so-
matic ciliary pattem. Note undulated peristomial portion of adoral ciliary spiral. 11: Anterior polar view of oral ciliature and contractile ap-
paratus; asterisk = contracted oral opening, arrow = epistomial membrane. 12: Postelior polar view. AC = adoral ciliary spiral, AW = anlage
of aboral ciliary wreath, CV = contractile vacuoles, FV = food vacuole, Q = germinal kinety, MA = macronucleus, MY = myonemes, PC =
peristomial collar,PD=peristomialdisc,PEl=peniculusl,S=scopula,UM=undulatingmembrane,V=vestibulum.
I
i
191

Peritrichia
ir
\tf
MA
äü
tr'[
Vorticella vernalis (originals of an epiphytoplanktonic population ll'onr Lake Mondsee, Austria. I 3- I 9, in v ivo; 20, 2 I , protargol inrpregna-
tion). 13-17: Extended specimens attached to Fragilaria colonies. Note different length ofstalk. Usually, only one specimen is attached per
colony (14-17), rarely two (13). Arrows in (13, 16) denote vestibular entrance. Arrows in (17) mark pellicular blisters. 18: Pellicle striation
and blisters (anows), whose number and distinctiveness are highly variable. The blisters should not be confused with the pellicular tubercles
of -+ P seudohaplocaulus. 19: Note that stalk granules are inconspicuous compared with those of V. picta (Fig. I d). 20, 2l: Lateral and pos-
terior polar view of silver-impregnated specimens. AW = anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, MA = macronucleus, ST = stalk myoneme.
498

Peritrichia
ä4
A#+Unfi
äs
Vorticella yenrulis loriginals ol an cpiphytoplanktonic population liom Lake Mondsee. Austria. 21. 27. scauniug clcctroll nlictographsl
23-26,Wotargol impregnation; 28, in vivo). 22: Oblique anterior polar view ofa slightly contracted specimen. Note the huge adoral ciliary,
which describes two tums on the peristomial disc (cp. Figure 24). 23-26:.Lateral (23,26) and anterior polar views (24, 2-5) showing the oral
ciliature.Notethatpeniculus3andproximalendof peniculus2formadistincthump(cp.Fig.3).Anowsin(23)markpeniculi l-3,arrowin
(24) denotes distal end of adoral ciliary spiral and undulating membrane. 27,28t Helically contracted stalks attached to Fragilaria. The
specimen in (27) is forming an aboral ciliary wreath. AC = adoral ciliary spiral, AW = aboral ciliary wreath, DI = diatom colony
(Fragitaria),EM = epistomial membrane, MY = myonemes (contractile fibres), ST = stalk, UM = undulating membrane.
499

Peritrichia
iiG.i
r&lt' 1:: .W,..'t \.: #*.: .a
ss
Vorticella vernalis afier Klein-Foissner silver nitrate impregnation (originals of an epiphytoplanktonic population tiom Lake Mondsee, Aus-
tia).29-31: Total views ofsilverline system ofslightly (29,31) and completely (30) contracted specimens. Arrow in (29) marks distal end
ofadoral ciliary spiral. 32,33: Swarmers with aboral ciliary wreath comptrsed ofmany short, oblique ciliary rows. AW = anlage (29-31) of
aboral ciliary wreath, DI = diatom colony (Fragilaria), S = scopula (stalk attachment site), ST = stalk.
500

Peritrichia
P s e udohaplo c aulus infrav acuolatus ForssNER & BRozEK, I 996
1996 Pseudohaplocaulus infravacuolarzs FOISSNER & BROZEK,Int. Rev. ges. Hydrobiol., 81: 330.
Taxonomy
Pseudohaplocaulus WARREN, 1988, Haplocaulus PRECHT, 1935, and some related genera (revision, see
WARREN 1988) differ fromVorticel/a LINNAEUS,176l and Pseudovorticella FOISSNER & SCHIFFMANN,
1914 in that the stalk does not contract helically but sinuously (zigzag),like a concertina. Furthermore, Pseudo-
haplocaulus does not have a transversely striated pellicle and annular silverlines, like for example, Haplocaulus
and Vorticella, but conspicuous tubercles (Fig. 2, 38, 42) and a reticulate silverline system (Fig. 22, 36), like
Pseudoyorticella.
Differential diagnosis
1) Extended cells in vivo 4l-61 x 3242 Um, on average 60 x 40 pm, that is, length about 1.5 times width (Fig.
3,25-21).
2) Extended cells slenderly to distinctly campanulate, about half of specimens nodding, that is, more or less
obliquely attached to main stalk axis (Fig. 3-6, 25-28); cells not as contractile as most other vorticellids and
thus often remaining partially extended when fixed for preparations. Fully contracted specimens barrel-
shaped or clavate (Fig. 11,38, 41).
3) Macronucleus in longitudinal axis of cell, J-shaped and both ends additionally often slightly curved; micronu-
cleus ellipsoidal, usually near anterior end of macronucleus (Fig. 3, 6,1-12,21).
4) Two contractile vacuoles invariably at ventral wall of vestibulum, one pre-equatorially slightly underneath
vestibular opening, the other in body centre near cytostome (Fig. 3 , 24).
s) Pellicle, except on peristomial disc, with conspicuous tubercles, especially anterior body half and peristomial
collar often studded with large blisters; distinctiveness of tubercles varies in different specimens, but always
recognizable at a magnification of >400x, at least in anterior body half; tubercles usually much more irregular
than underlying reticulate silverline system (Fig.2,28,3843). A total of 44 tubercle, that is, silverline mesh
rows: 2l*26 (mean = 24; n = 36) mesh rows from anterior end to anlage of aboral ciliary wreath and 16-22
(mean = 20: n= 39) from aboral ciliary wreath to stalk (Fig. 13, 22,35*38).
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar slightly to distinctly projecting beyond body
proper. Peristomial disc usually slightly convex, conspicuously raised in feeding specimens. Vestibulum
large, about Yz of body length, in feeding cells almost transverse to main body axis (Fig. 3, 4,24-28). Adoral
ciliary spiral and undulating membrane (haplokinety) describe 1.5 turns on peristomial disc before plunging
into vestibulum, accomplishing a further turn (Fig. 11*21,29-32). Cilia extraordinarily long (20 pm), very
likely an adaptation to the planktonic mode of life (Fig. 3, 38).
7) Stalk unbranched and smooth, contracts sinuously due to distinct myoneme, 4-6 pm across, does not narrow
distally, usually about as long as body, rarely up to 200 pm, attached to cyanobacterial filaments or, possibly,
to their slimy sheath (Fig. 3, 28).
8) Solitary and sessile on planktonic cyanobacteria, possibly a specific epibiont of Anabaena coenobia (Fig. 1,
3,23). Appears colonial when very abundant (Fig. 23).
Similar species
Pseudohaplocaulus infravacuolalus resembles P. anabaenae (STILLER, 1940) WARREN, 1988, especially in
having two contractile vacuoles and a similar size, shape, pellicle structure, and habitat. However, the location of
501

Peritrichia
the contractile vacuoles is different: both are situated on the ventral wall of the vestibulum in P. inft'atacuolatus
(Fig. 3, 24), whereas one vacuole is located at the dorsal vestibular wall in P. anabaenae (Fig. 14, arrows). Some
other characters also differ in P. inJi'avacuolatus and P. anabaenae, namely the size (length 4l-67 vs.40-50
pm), the vestibulum (unusually small in P. anabaenae), the equidistant stalk (gradually narrowed in P. anahae-
nae), and the pellicle structure (tubercles of same size and distinctiveness throughout in P . anabaenae). The third
species of Pseudohaplocaulus, P. nicoleae (PRECHT, 1935) WARREN, 1988, is an epizoite of a marine poly-
chaete and has only a single, ventral contractile vacuole. Pseudohaplocaulus infravacuolarus is easily confused
with Pseudovorticella monilata (detailed description, see FOISSNER et al. 1992c, p. 130), from which it differs
only by the generic character, viz.,the mode of stalk contraction (helical versus zigzag; -) taxonomy).4,5 (pel-
licle with tubercles), 7 arekey characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: As yet found only at the locus classicus, a shallow, eutrophic lake (Grabensee) in
Salzburg, ,Austria, where FOISSNER & BROZEK (1996) discovered P. infravacuolatus atlached to planktonic
colonies of Anahaena sp. in early November, often in great number and together with -+ Vortic:ella c'hlorellata
(Fig. 1,23).Recentlyfoundalsoinotherlakesof thisdistrict.GAJEWSKAJA(1933)observedaPseudovorti-
cella monilata attached to Anabaena in Lake Baikal, indicating that she found a Pseudohaplocaulus (Fig. l5);
unfortunately, essential morphological characters (number of contractile vacuoles, contraction mode of stalk)
were not given, preventing a reliable post-identification. Pseudohaplocaulus infravacuolalas is probably less
common than P. anabaenae, which has been observed by several authors (CANTER et al. 1992, KERR 1983),
according to FOISSNER & BROZEK (1996).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on algae. Biomass of 106 specimens about 30 mg (our cal-
culations). Possibly not as rare as indicated by its late discovery because very likely sometimes confused with
Pseudovortic'ella spp. or not identified to species level. Probably a specific epibiont of cyanobacteria, especially
Anahaena. Very likely indicates eutrophy when occurring in great number.
502

Peritricl-ria
\ -rr<1\' .t'''
PC
cv4
AruABATNA
.V§i^
\\ +
,ru
11
Pseudohaplocaulus infravacuolatus (l-13, from FOISSNER & BROZEK 1996. l-6, in vivo; l-12, protargol
impregnation; 13, silver nitrate impregnation). 1: Coenobium of Anabaena sp. heavily colonized by P. infravat'uolatus and
--> Vortic'ella c'hlorellata (arrows), which is easily recognizable due to its longer stalk. 2: Tuberculate pellicle. 3-6: Repre-
sentative specimens, cells 47-67 pm long. 7-12: Yariability of nuclear apparatus, length 3242 pm. 13: Silverline system at
anlage of aboral ciliary wreath (arrow), which is composed of 3-4 very narrowly spaced silverline mesh rows. CV = contrac-
tile vacuoles, both at ventral wall of vestibulum, FV = food vacuole, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, MY = stalk
myoneme, PC = peristomial collar, PD = peristomial disc, ST = stalk (contracts in zigzag, not helically!).
Pseudohaplocaulus anabaenae (14,in vivo; length ofcel1 4G-45 pm) has, like, P. infravacuolatus, two contractile vacuoles
(arrows) of which one, however, is at the dorsal wall (upper arrow) of the vestibulum (from STILLER 1940).
Vorticella monilata sensu GAJEWSKAJA 1933 (15, in vivo; length of cell 50 pm) is possibly a Pseudohaploc'aulus infra-
vacuolatus (for details, see occurrence and ecology section).
503

Peritrich ia
I
:",,ilIfi
,i,,i,ü;,,
utvtJ\Ät'i'r\A Arl^.'
)[:)
PE J
/\\.
PrP 3t2 (( i)( aa<, r, .a a' , ,; lr. o .; .a o .t . o . . .\. ot a . .t .a .q . : \ .i ""o .; t .at ' ]t t!a b: . at::. a r, f t1 (oa lo aan oti i: r!.a j * a it . i a ) !" 'tt \ oe:a. aaa a1 aa cl r l aoa aa 'o a at. a 'aa ja aaa ,a t: il ,. ?a aa D.Iat r ra . ao al a tao l ,a .it at ) i:ta ;
oa'iI azr:l'.::r: iti{
1l ,
icaalil
# aal ot o*po ,lao to iac
ao'F(l
ooat.t!
220
UM
Pseudohaplocaulus infravacuolatus (from FOISSNER & BROZEK 1996. 16-2 l, protargol impregnation;22, Klein-
Foissner silver nitrate impregnation). 16: Scopula (stalk attachment site). 17-19: Lateral and frontal view of oral ciliary pat-
tem. Distal end (arrowhead in 19) of adoral ciliary spiral is shown at higher magnification in ( 1 8). Arrow in ( l9) denotes the
epistomial membrane, a short, special ciliary row of unknown function (not necessary for identification) close to the germi-
nal kinety from which the new oral apparatus develops during division.20,2L: Proximal end and mid-region of adoral cili-
ary spiral (left PE3 is PE1, labelling mistake!). 22: Silverline system. AC = adoral ciliary spiral, AW = anlage of aboral cili-
ary wreath, § = germinal kinety, PE1-3 = peniculi, UM = undulating membrane (haplokinety).
504

Peritrichia
31
Pseudohaplocaulus inJravacuolatus ltiom FOISSNER & BROZEK 1996. 23-2ä, in vivo bli-qht l'ield and intcrlcretrce cor.t
trast micrographs;29-31, protargol impregnation).23: Anabaena coenobium heavily colonized by P. inJiavacuolatus.
24-28: Shape variability and location of contractile vacuoles. The specimen shown in (24) has been slightly squeezed to re-
veal the specific location of the contractile vacuoles more clearly (arrows), that is, at the ventral wall of the vestibulum. Note
the nodding specimen shown in (28). Arrow in (25) denotes vestibular entrance. 29-31: Vestibular portion of oral ciliary
pattern (cp. Figures 17-21). FV = food vacuole, MA = macronucleus, MY = myoneme, ST = stalk, UM = undulating mem-
brane (haplokinety), V = vestibulum, 1-l = peniculi (adoral membranelles).
50s

Peritrichia
Y,{rlffi
t&;1,;'.;1:;:,t:"t"'
mff.*
ffiffi
Pseudohaplocaulus inJ'ravacuolafas (li'om FOISSNER & BROZEK 1996. -12-34, protargol impregnation; -3-5--37, Klcin-Foissnel silver ni-
trate impregnation). 32: Oral and somatic ciliature. Arrows mark distal and proximal end of adoral ciliary spiral; arrowheads denote tums of
ciliary spiral. 33: Rarely, a cortical lattice, which is very similar or even identical to the silverline system, impregnates with protargol. 34:
Many pellicular tubercles contain argyrophilic substance (arrows, see also 36;. 35, 37: Silverline system in posterior portion and details of
anlageof aboralciliarywreath(cp.Figures 13,39,40).36:Total viewof silverlinesystemshowingthatthenumberof silverlinemeshrows
is very similar between anterior end and anlage ofthe aboral ciliary wreath, and between aboral ciliary wreath and scopula (stalk attachment
site). Anow marks distal end of adoral ciliary spiral. AC = adoral ciliary spiral, AW = anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, MY = myonemes in
peristomial collar, PD = peristomial disc, ST = stalk.
506

Peritrichia
Pseudohaplocaulus inJravacuolatus (fTom FOISSNER & BROZEK 1996. 3841, 43, scanning electron rniclographs; 42, in
vivo interference contrast micrograph). 38,41,42: Variability of surface ornamentation (pellicular tubercles). Pseudohaplo-
ruulus inJi'avacuolatus is less contractile than Vorticella and Pseudovot'ticella speciel Thus, body shape and adoral cilia are
rather well preserved in prepared cells. The cilia are extraordinarily long (in vivo 20 pm), very likely an adaptation to the
planktonic mode of life. 39, 40: Posterior region showing anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, which is composed of 4 narrowly
spaced rows of tubercles. 43: Peeled specimen showing that the pellicular tubercles are more irregular than the cortical (sil-
verline) pattern (cp. Figures 36,37,42). AC = adoral ciliary spiral, AW = anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, pQ = peristomial
collar, ST = stalk (contracts in zigzagt).
501

Peritrichia
Epicarchesium pectinatum (zACHARIAS, 18e7) nov. comb.
l89l Zoothamnium pectinatumZACHARIAS, ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 5: 7.
189'7 Zoothamnium limneticum SVBC, Bull. int. Acad. tch6que Sci., 4: 43 (synonym).
1933 Zoothamnium limneticum §VeC - GAJEWSKAJA, Zoologica,32: 165 (illustrated record).
1935 Carchesium (Zoothamnium) pectinatum (ZACHARIAS, 1897) - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 739 (revision;
combination with Carchesium; redescription from life).
1948 Carchesium limneticumsYEC- FAURE-FREMIET, Anais Acad. bras. Cienc., 2O: lO3 (morphogenesis).
1992 Carchesium pectinatum (ZACHARIAS, 1897) KAHL, L935 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN,In-
formationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192: 146 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxo-
nomic and ecological monograph).
1992 Carchesium pectinatum (ZACHARIAS 1897) - PACKROFF, Arch. Hydrobiol. Beih. Ergebn. Limnol.,
38: 219 (redescription).
Taxonomy
PACKROFF (1992) confirmed KAHL's (1935) observations thatZoothamnium pectinatumhas a tuberculate pel-
licle (hence, a reticulate silverline system; Fig. 4,29,34) and discontinuous stalk myonemes at the ramification
sites (Fig. 2,6,21,30). Thus, it has to be transferredto EpicarchesiumJANKOWSKI, 1985, a genus firmly es-
tablished recently by LEITNER & FOISSNER (1997).
Differential diagnosis
l) Extended zooids in vivo 40-70 pm, usually about 60 pm long, approximately as wide as long (Fig. 1, 9, 18).
2) Extended zooids conspicuously campanulate, usually nodding (Fig. l, 3,1-9,18,24). Contracted specimens
globular (Fig. 20, 22, 28).
3) Macronucleus in longitudinal axis of cell, J-shaped (Fig. 1, 9,26,21).
4) Two contractile vacuoles at ventral wall of vestibulum (Fig.25-28); second vacuole overlooked by previous
authors (Fig. 1,8,9).
5) Pellicle with + conspicuous tubercles (Fig. l, 9,22,23,29,32,34). A total of roughly 32fibercle, that is, sil-
verline mesh rows: about 18 mesh rows from anterior end to anlage of aboral ciliary wreath and about 14
from aboral ciliary wreath to scopula (stalk, Fig. 4).
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end ofcell, peristomial collar slightly projecting beyond body proper. Peristo-
mial disc almost flat. Vestibulum of usual size, extends almost transversely to main body axis (Fig. L,9,25,
26).
7) Stalk particularly branched (Fig. 5, 19; -+ character 8), contractile due to distinct myonemes not fused at
ramification sites, about 8 pm across, surface smooth (Fi5.2,3,6,10,13,21,23,30).
8) Colonies up to 1.36 mm long, consist of up to 70 zooids, fan-shaped when extended (not roundish in trans-
verse view like -+ Epistylis procumbens), globular when contracted. The main stalk, whose proximal portion
curves like a crook, develops five lateral branches one after the other; the oldest branch detaches from the
main stalk when four lateral offspring have been formed (Fig. 3, 5), leaving a wedge-shaped notch providing
the main stalk with a highly characteristic pectinate (species name!) appearance (Fig. 2, ll, 12, 14-16, 19,
20,31; details, see FAURE-FREMIET 1948). Euplanktonic, colonies usually swim with stalk directed for-
ward (Fig. 5, 16).
Similar species
Easy to identify because ofthe planktonic habit and the conspicuous stalk notches (Fig. 31). The type species of
Epicarchesium, E. granulatum (KELLICOTT, 1887) JANKOWSKI, 1985, is sessile (detailed redescription by
508

Peritrichia
LEITNER & FOISSNER 1997). -+ Epistylis procumbens, a colonial, planktonic peritrich too, has an acontractile
stalk without myoneme and the zooids are usually distinctly larger (about 100 pm) and thinner (2-2.5:l). Pelagic
vorticellids (-+ Pelagovorticella mayeri, -+ P. natans) live solitarily . J ,8 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: In the plankton of lakes and ponds, occasionally in large rivers (LIEPA 1983), usu-
ally peaking during the warm seasons (BEUSCHOLD 1961, KAPLIN 1969, §VEC 1897); less common than -->
Epistylis procumbens. Loci classici are a lake (Kleiner Plöner See) in Germany and a pond in Czechoslovakia,
where ZACHARIAS (1S97), respectively, SVBC (tASZ) discovered E. pectinatum in the summer plankton (May to
July) with a maximum in June (SVEC 1897). Further records substantiated by illustrations: with low abundance in a
eutrophic lake (Grabensee) in Austria during early December (Fig. 25-34); lakes in northem Germany during June
and July (VOIGT 1902); ponds and lakes near Hamburg, Germany (KAHL 1935); sporadically in the epilimnion,
but also in the upper hypolimnion, of a eutrophic lake (Meerfelder Maar) in Germany (PACKROFF 1992); French
lake in May (FAURB-f'RBUfgf 1948); in Lake Baikal with high abundance, peaking from summer to autumn
(GAJEWSKAJA 1933, KAPLIN 1969; details -+ autecological data); billabong in the Ryan's Murray River
system, Australia (Fig. fi2q. Epicarchesium pectinatum is easy to identify; thus, also records not substantiated by
illustrations are reliable: reservoir in Bulgaria (DETCIIEVA 1992); slightly eutrophic reservoir (Saidenbach-
Talsperre) in Germany during June and July (BEUSCHOLD 1961); very abundant in Swedish lakes during June but
also in early March (PEJLER 1964); mesosaprobic Azerbaijanian reservoirs (ALEKPEROV 1982); up to
690 ind. l-r in Ukrainian reservoirs (MAMAEVA 1916b, 1979, MAMAYEVA & KOPYLOV 1918);285 ind. I I in
a Lake Onega bay, USSR, polluted by pulp and paper mill wastes (MAZHEIKAITE 1969); mesotrophic reservoir
and eutrophic lake in Kuban region, USSR (KORNIYENKO 1972);Baltic Sea (BOIKOVA 1984).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on bacteria, small algae, and organic debris (MAMAYE-
VA & KOPYLOV 1978, PACKROFF 1992). Biomass of 106 zooids according to MAMAYEVA & KOPYLOV
(1978) about 40 mg, according to FOISSNER et al. (1992c) 60 mg. GAJEWSKAJA (1933) found great numbers
of Epicarchesium pectinatum in shallow bays of Lake Baikal at 8.9-15.6" C, pH7.3-7.5,9.5-12.9 mgl't C)2, 17
to 22mg I I CaO, 1.3-3 mg I' MgO, 2.64.8 mg l-r SiOz. Only some colonies occurred at a depth of 25 m at 5.2
toJ.l" C,pH1.3,11.6 mg l-1 C.2,23 mg l-r CaO, 2.7 mg I I MgO, 2.3 mg l-r SiO2. Reliably recorded from Eurasia
and Australia. Euplanktonic in lakes and ponds, prefers the warm seasons, rather rare. Saprobic classification ac-
cording to FOISSNER et al. (1992c): oligosaprobic to betamesosaprobic (o = 6, b = 4,I = 3, SI = 1.4).
CV
ST-
collar 65 Um in diameter. Arrow marks vestibular entrance.2,3: Ramification sites (bar l0 pm) and colony with five branches. Note that
stalk myonemes (black) ofindividual specimens are not fused.4: Silvefline system. AC = adoral ciliary spiral, AW = anlage ofaboral ciliary
wreath, CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus, PC = peristomial collar, S = scopula, ST = stalk.
s09

Peritrichia
MA
/
14
15
Epicarchesiumpectinatum in vivo (5,6,9, 12, 13, liom KAHL 1935; 7,8, fiom KAHL 1935, redrawn from §VEC 1897;
10, 11, after §VSC tSgZ; 14, from ZACHARIAS 1897 15, from GAJEWSKAJA 1933;16, from VOIGT 1902).5: The
colonies of E. pectinatum are rather large and fan-shaped, that is, flat because branching is two-dimensional. Arrowhead
marks branch that separates next from main sta1k. Arrow denotes swimming direction. 6, 12: Details from main stalk, show-
ing that myonemes of individual specimens are not fused. 7: Small, probably squeezed colony. 8, 9: Extended zooids, ? pm,
60 pm. Arrowhead in (8) marks pectinate area of stalk, arrow denotes contractile vacuole. 10, 13: Distal end of stalk. 11:
Proximal, pectinate area of stalk (arrow). 14: Portion of colony with zooids possibly drawn too slenderly. 15: Colony from
Lake Baikal. Arrows mark pectinate area of stalks. 16: Portion of.a colony. Arrow marks swimming direction. MA = macro-
nucleus, MY = stalk myoneme (contractile fibre), PC = peristomial collar, PD = peristomial disc.
510

Peritrichia
Epicarchesium pectinatum in vivo (originals of a population tiom the Murray River system, Austlalia, kindly supplied by H. BLATTERER,
Linz, Upper Austria). 17: Whole colony showing typical branching. 18: Part of a colony showing nodding zooids. 19: Anterior portion of
two colonies. Arrows mark the typical five lateral branches developing from the main stalk (cp. Figures 3, 5).
511

Peritrichia
Epicarchesium pectinatum in vivo (originals of a population from the Murray River system, Australia, kindly supplied by
Mag. H. BLATTERER, Linz, Upper Austria). 202 Part of colony with contracted specimens. Note serrated (pectinate) stalk
(arrows). 2l:Detail of stalk showing that the myonemes are not fused at the ramification sites (arrowheads, cp. Figure 30).
22t Part of contracted colony showing tuberculate pellicle and helically contracted stalks.
5t2

Peritrichia
Epicarchesiurn pectinatum in vivo (originals ot' a population fl'onr the Murray River system, Austratliet, kindly supplied by
Mag. H. BLATTERER, Linz, Upper Austria). 23: Slightly contracted zooids showing tuberculate pellicle (arrows) and
granulated stalk myonemes, which are not fused at the ramification sites (arrowheads). 242 Extended, broadly campanulate
zooids.
513



Peritrichia
Epistylis anastaticc (LTNNAEUI, ti6i) EHRENBERG, 1830
116'7 Vorticella anastatica LINNAEUS, Systema Naturae, p.l3l7 (without illustration).
1786 Vorticella anastatica - MÜLLER, Animalcula Infusoria, p. 326 (illustration).
1830 Epistylis anastatica - EHRENBERG, Abh. dt. Akad. Wiss. Berl., year 1830: 4l (combining author).
1838 Epistylis anastatica (LINNE, 1767) -EHRENBERG, Infusionsthierchen, p. 281 (revision).
1884 Epistylis lacustis IMHOFF, Z. wiss. Zool.,40: 168 (new synonym).
1933 Epistylis anastatica LINN. 1761 - WANG & NIE, Contr. biol. Lab. Sci. Soc. China, 10: 69
(redescription).
1935 Episelis lacustis IMHOFF, 1884 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 686 (revision).
1935 Epistylis (Vorticella) anastaticallNNE, 1167 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 689 (revision).
1951 Epistylis lacustris IMHOFF 1884 (STILLER 1940) - SOMMER, Arch. Hydrobiol., 44:369 (illustrated).
1964 Epistylis lacustris IMHOFF - LOM, Arch. Protistenk., 107: 147 (silver impregnation of oral ciliature).
1992 Epistylis nympharurz ENGELMANN, 1862 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informations-
berichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192: 217 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and
ecological monograph; pro parte: Fig. l-3, l2).
Taxonomy
Very likely, Epistylis lacustris IMHOFF is a junior synonym of Vorticella anastatica LINNAEUS as redescribed
by EHRENBERG. This is suggested by the identical size (60-100 pm) and shape (slightly conical) of the zooids
and colonies, the C-shaped macronucleus, the ventral location of the contractile vacuole, and the habitat (usually
planktonic crustaceans). Epistylis lacustris yar. magna NENNINGER, 1948 is very likely a junior synonym of E.
nympharum ENGELMANN, 1862, as indicated by the size (>100 pm), the barrel-shaped outline, the accumula-
tion of granules near the stalk, the dorso-lateral location of the contractile vacuole, and, especially, the benthic
hosts (Fig. 3443).
Di iierential diagnosi
s
1) Extended zooids in vivo 60--100 pm long, length2-2.5 times width (Fig.2,15,22).
2) Extended zooids usually slightly conical (Fig.2,4,9,10,13,22). Contracted specimens ellipsoidal to pyri-
form (Fig. 3, 6, l9). Posterior body portion hyaline under bright field illumination due to lack of refractile
granules (Fie.15,22).
3) Macronucleus in longitudinal axis of cell, slightly curved to C-shaped, that is, not in transverse axis and semi-
circular as in many other species of genus (Fig. 4, 5, 9, 13, 32.33).
4) Contractile vacuole slightly undemeath peristomial collar at ventral wall of vestibulum (Fig. 3, 4,9,21-23);
at dorsal wall in some old descriptions, possibly due to superficial observations (Fig. 4, 5).
s) Pellicle with a total of about 7 5 rather distinct transverse striae (silverlines; Fig. 16, 23, 25): 44-61 (usually
49-58; n = 140, 5 populations) silverlines from anterior end to anlage of aboral ciliary wreath and 17-26
(usually 19-23) from aboral ciliary wreath to stalk (scopula).
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar narrow and about as wide as body, that is, not
distinctly projecting beyond body proper. Peristomial disc slightly convex and + obliquely raised in feeding
specimens. Vestibulum of usual size, extends obliquely to middle third of cell (Fig. 2, 4,9, 12, 13, 15,21,
23);not angled as inE. nympharum (Fig.36-38, a0).
7) Stalk dichotomously branching, acontractile (myoneme lacking) and smooth (not annulated but internally
finely striated longitudinally), about 8-12 pm across, last branchings up to length of zooids (Fig. 3, 4, 10, 13,
15,19,27,29-31); main stalk (portion from substrate to first branching) often rather long (Fig. 1,2,8).
8) Colonies usually with many zooids, umbellate, that is, all zooids near same level. Epizooplanktonic, usually
on crustaceans (Fig. l, 2,1, 8, 10, 1 1, 14, 17, 18, 26).
515

Peritrichia
Similar species
Easily identified by the (mostly) epizooplanktonic habit and the ventral location of the contractile vacuole. In
spite of this, several authors confused E. anastatica with E. nympharum ENGELMANN, 1862, which usually
lives on benthic animals, is larger (>100 pm), has a barrel-shaped outline, an accumulation of granules near the
stalk (2026 pm across), a knee-shaped vestibulum, and a dorso-laterally located contractile vacuole (Fig.3443;
detailed description, see FOISSNER et al. 1992c, p. 217 [unfortunately partially confused with E. anastatica]
and FOISSNER 1996, as E. lacustris magna). -+ Epistylis digitalis is very similar in all characters except for the
annulated stalk. Further similar epizoons: Epistylis puerneri NENNINGER, 1948 (about 180;rm long, peristo-
mial disc distinctly notched by several tums of adoral ciliary spiral), E. variabilis STILLER, 1953 (contractile
vacuole at dorsal wall of vestibulum, macronucleus horseshoe-shaped in transverse axis of cell; redescription in
FOISSNER 1919b).1,2,3,4 (contractile vacuole at ventral wall of vestibulum),7 (stalk smooth),8 (usually
epiplanktonic on crustaceans) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common epibiont of planktonic crustaceans in ponds, lakes and, occasionally,
running waters; colonizes all body regions with, however, some preference for the rear legs. MÜLLER (1773,
1786) observed Epistylis anastatica on aquatic plants and animals near Copenhagen, Denmark. EHRENBERG
(1838) found it attached to Ceratophyllum and small crustaceans in water bodies near Berlin, Germany, during
summer and autumn. IMHOFF (1884) discovered the synonym Epistylis lacustris in Swiss lakes (Vierwaldstät-
tersee, Zugersee, Agerisee, Zürichsee, Greifensee), where it was usually attached to planktonic copepods and the
euplanktonic cladoceran Bythotrephes longimanus.
Further records documented by illustrations: on all body regions of Cyclops sp. from small ponds in Upper Aus-
tria, often being so abundant that the hosts were covered with a whitish down visible to the naked eye (FOISS-
NER & SCHIFFMANN 1975); on copepods of a mesotrophic lake (Obertrumersee) near Salzburg, Austria, dur-
ing early spring (Fig. 14-22, 26-33); on various planktonic animals (cyclopids, daphnids, mites) of a lake
(Großer Plöner See) in Germany throughout the year (SOMMER 1951); attached to cyclopids in Czechoslova-
kian waters (LOM 1964); Lake Balaton, Hungary (DADAY 1885); frequent and abundant on Cyclops agilis and
Macrocyclops albidus in Lake Ohrid, Macedonia (GREEN 1960); frequent on Cyclops in ponds near Nanking,
China (WANG & NIE 1933); lake in East Africa (DADAY 1907).
Records of the synonym Epistyli lacustris not substantiated by illustrations: attached to Cyclops wtd Unionicola
crassipes in Bavarian freshwaters (BIEGEL 1954; MATTHES 1950, see this paper for further records); meso-
trophic lake (Laacher See) in Germany (PACKROFF 1992, PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991); common in the pe-
lagial (host not mentioned) of a lake (Obersee) in Estonia, rare in May, abundant during June and July (SCHNEI-
DER 1909); ox-bow of Danube River in Hungary (NOSEK & BERECZKY 1981); on Leptodora hyalina in Lake
Balaton, Hungary (FRANCE 1897); on Cyclops in Italy (CANELLA 1954); bogs in Switzerland (MERMOD
1914); alpine lake (Weissensteinsee; 2030 m above sea level) in Switzerland (ZSCHOKKE 1900); profundal
(30-125 m) of a large lake (Neuenburgersee) in Switzerland (MONARD 1920); in Lake Geneva at8*25" C from
late June to late December (ANDRE 1916, NAEF 1995, NAEF & MARTIN 1990,1993a,b,1994, NAEF et al.
1996; many further records from Switzerland, see ANDRE 1912); benthic in Azerbaijanian lakes (ALIEV 1982);
reservoirs in the USSR (KRAVCHENKO 1969); on copepods tp to 29 ind. l-r in the eutrophic Lake Kinneret, Is-
rael, during early November (MADONI 1990); Yuelushan Area, China, in winter (YANG 1989); Tibetan Plateau
(SHEN r983).
Autecological data and ecotogical summary: Feeds on bacteria. Biomass of 106 middle-sized specimens about
60 mg (our calculations). Reliably recorded from Europe and Asia. Common epibiont of pelagic crustaceans in
stagnant water bodies. Occurs throughout the year, cold seasons, however, possibly preferred.
5t6

Peritrichia
\
CV
PD-
C/,
P
CV
MA
MI
Pr1
,
I
I \
I\ III
10 \, 12 13
Epistylis andstatica ( l, lionr MULLER 1786;2,8, I l, fiom EHRENBERG 1838; 3, fiom KAHL 1935; 4, tiom WANG & NIE 1933; 5-7,
10, from KENT 1882; 9, from FOISSNER & SCHIFFMANN 1975; 12, from LOM 1964; 13, from IMHOFF 1884. 1-1 l, 13, in vivo; 12,
protargol impregnation). l, 2, 13: Large colonies. 3: Epistylis lacustris forma dichotoma. 41 9: Parls of colonies, zooids about 80 pm long.
Arrows in (4) mark vestibular entrance. Note that in (4) the contractile vacuole is illustrated both at the ventral and dorsal (right specimen;
probably a misobservation) wall of the vestibulum. 5: Extended zooid, 90 pm. The dorsal location of the contractile vacuole is probably a
misobservation. 6: Contracted zooid with snout-like anterior end (cp. Figure 19).7,L0,11: Large colonies attached to copepods. 8: Colony
with contracted zooids. 12: Proximal (vestibular) portion of oral ciliature. CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronu-
cleus, PC = peristomial collar, PD = peristomial disc, PEl = peniculus 1,V = vestibulum.
5tl

Peritrichia
Epistylisanastatica (originalsfiomapopulationof-lakeMondseeinUpperAustria. l4-l6,invivobrightfieldandinterf'er-
ence contrast micrographs; 17-20, scanning electron micrographs). l4rt7r18:. Large colonies attached to copepods. 15: Ex-
tended, feeding specimen. Arrow marks vestibular entrance. 16: Surface view showing coarse transverse striation of pellicle
and anlage of aboral ciliary wreath (arrow). 19: Contracted specimens of a large colony. 20: Proximal end of stalk showing
fine canals producing the longitudinal striation of the stalk recognizable with the light microscope (Fig. 3 1). PD = peristo-
mial disc.
5r8

Peritrichia
ßpistylß andstatica \21,22, or\ginals fl'orn a population of lake Mondsee in Upper Austria; 23-25, tiom FOISSNER & SCHIFFMANN
1975. 21,22, in vivo micrographs of same colony in Normarski differential interference contrast and bright field; 23,24, in vivo, phase con-
trast micrographs; 25, Klein-Foissner silver nitrate impregnation). 21, 22: Colony with about 1 6 zooids attached to the posterior part of a co-
pepod. Note typical, slightly funnel-shaped outline of zooids and contractile vacuole at ventral wall of vestibulum, which distinguishes
Epistylisanastatica frommanyotherepistylids,especially E.nympharum(Fig.3443). Notethattheposteriorbodyportionisnotdarkat
bright field illumination, in contrast to E. nympharum (Fig. 36-38, 42). Arrow in (21) marks vestibular entrance. 23, 24:, Extetded speci-
mens showing shape variability and coarse transverse striation ofpellicle (large arrow in 23). Small arrow marks inconspicuous peristomial
collar, arrowhead denotes vestibular entrance. 25: Silverline system. Arrows mark anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, arrowhead denotes stalk
attachment site (scopula). CV = contractile vacuole at ventral wall of vestibulum.
5t9

Peritrichia
Epistylis anastatica (originals fiom a population of lake Mondsee in Upper Austria. 26, in vivo bright field micrograph;27-29, scanning
electron micrographs; 30, 3 1, in vivo interference contrast micrographs; 32, 33, methyl green-pyronin stain). 26: Very large colony attached
to the posterior legs of a copepod. Note the characteristic, slightly conical shape of the zooids (arrows). 27r 29-31: The stalk of Epistytis
branches dichotomously and is acontractile, that is, lacks a myoneme. The fine longitudinal striation (31) ofthe stalkof Epistylis anastatica
and many other epistylids is caused by many tiny pipes (Fig. 20) and thus not recognizable in scanning electron microscope (Fig.27).28:.
Frontal view ofa slightly and completely contracted zooid.32,33: The C-shaped macronucleus extends in the longitudinal axis ofthe cell,
pf
which is an important species character. MA = macronucleus, = peristomial collar.
520

Peritrichia
Epistylis nympharum (34-36, 39, from F'OISSNER
1996 and originals of same population attached to Lepi-
durus apus, a benthic branchiopod from temporary
fieshwaters near Vienna, Austria; 37,38, from ENGEL-
MANN 1862. 34, 35, 39, scanning electron micro-
graphs; 36-38, in vivo). 34r 35: Ventral view of ante-
rior body portion of Lepidurus apus. Epistylis nyntpha-
runt is attached only to the mouthparts, where the large
colonies (arrows) form a whitish beard. 36-38: Ex-
tended zooids, 1 05- 1 57 p m, I 20 p m. Note accumula-
tion of refractile granules in posterior portion, which is
thus dark at bright field illumination (arrows, cp. Figure
42). 39: Posterior polar view end of a swarmer show-
ing aboral ciliary wreath and scopula (arrow), with
which the zooid was attached to the stalk. AW = aboral
ciliary wreath, CV = contractile vacuole, MA - macro-
nucleus.
52t

Peritrichia
M t?i i- ':l :'*, .:, ." : tt ::: :: :::a :: :a .:+ :: tt: :. :::t :: ::a :. .. :!4 :_ :*: t' ra !: r: i: , ::
l .: . : : . !
".
* a
:: . t: , ,' : 1. :, , ,' itlt:' ..t: : . ?:. ..
! :, :. ' + ,
,',.{i''
V
CV
42
$
Epistylis nympharum on Lepidurus dpus, Lr benthic blar-rchiopod from temporary freshwatels near Vienna, Austria (40-43,
from FOISSNER 1996. 40, 42, in vivo bright field micrographs; 41, 43, scanning electron micrographs). 40, 42: Extended
specimens, 105-l5Tpm.Noteaccumulationof refractilegranulesinposteriorportion,whichisthusdarkatbrightfieldillu-
mination (large arrows in 42); this is a very important difference to E. anastatica (Fi5.22,23). Some specimens have an um-
bilicated peristomial disc (small arrow in 42). Arrowhead in (42) marks cytopyge from which food remnants are just
released. 41: Contracted specimens on dichotomously branching stalks. 43: The stalk attachment site (scopula) is covered by
a slimy, reticulate substance. The cortex of the zooid is very narrowly striated, that is, has 100-l 25 striae from the anterior
end to the anlage of the aboral ciliary wreath and 45-65 from the aboral ciliary wreath to the stalk, in contrast to E. anas-
tatica, whichhas 4441, respectively, 17-26 striae (Fig. 25). CV = contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuole, S = scopula, V =
knee-shaped vestibulum (an important difference Io E. anastatica, where it extends obliquely to mid-body).
522

Peritrichia
E pistylis digitalis GTNNAEUS, l 7s8) EHRENBERG, I 830
17 58 Hydra digiralis LINNAEUS, Systema Naturae, p. 8 1 8 (with illustration).
l83O Epistylis digitalis - EHRENBERG, Abh. dt. Akad. Wiss. Berl., year 1830: 4l (combining author).
1838 Epistylis digitalis (LINNE, 1758) - EHRENBERG, Infusionsthierchen, p. 283 (revision).
1935 Epistylis digitalis EHRENBERG - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 689 (revision).
1953 Epistylis digitalis EHRENBERG (1838) - JIROVEC, WENIG, FOTT, BARTOS, WEISER A §nÄUgt<-
HUSEK, Protozoologie, p. 520 (illustrated record).
1992 Epistylis digitalis (LINNAEUS, 1758) EHRENBERG, 1830 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN,In-
formationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192: 212 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxo-
nomic and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
The populations listed differ in the location of the contractile vacuole. Further studies are required to clarify
whether this is due to misobservation or similar, but different species. The other characters agree well. Epistylis
lacustris var. rugosa KAHL, 1935 is very likely a junior synonym (FOISSNER et al. 1992c).
Differential diagnosis
r) Extended zooids in vivo 60-120 pm long,length 3-4 times width (Fig. 1, 4,14,11).
2) Extended zooids slenderly funnel-shaped (Fig. 3, 4, 6) to almost cylindrical (Fig. 1, 5, 14-16). Contracted
specimens pyriform with anterior end projecting snout-like (Fig. 2).
3) Macronucleus in longitudinal axis of cell, slightly curved to C-shaped, that is, not in transverse axis and semi-
circular as in many other species of genus (Fig. 3, 8).
4) Contractile vacuole slightly underneath peristomial collar; according to KAHL (1935), liROVgC et at.
(1953) and FOISSNER et al. (1992c) at ventral wall of vestibulum (Fig. 3, 8, 15), according to D'UDEKEM
(1864) at dorsal wall (Fig. 4, 5; see taxonomy).
5) Pellicle with rather distinct transverse striae (Fig. 24, 11 ,26). Number of striae not known.
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar about as wide as body, that is, not distinctly
projecting. Peristomial disc slightly convex and + obliquely raised in feeding specimens. Vestibulum incon-
spicuous, only about t/+ of body length (Fig. 3-6, 14, l7). Peniculi I and 3 distinctly longer than peniculus 2
(Fig. 10, 23,24; clearly recognizable only after silver impregnation; not necessary for identification).
7) Stalk dichotomously branching, acontractile (myoneme lacking) and annulated, about 10 pm across, last
branchings up to length of zooids, sometimes, however, very short, giving the impression of two zooids at-
tached to single broad stalk (Fig. 1, 4,8,14, 18-20,25);main stalk (portion from substrate to first branching)
usually also rather short (Fig.5,6, 8, 15, l1).
8) Colonies large, up to 1.6 mm high, conical, that is, all zooids near same level. Epizoic, mainly on cyclopids
(Fig.9, 11, 13, ts-r7).
Similar species
Easily identified by the epizoic habit and the ventral location of the contractile vacuole. -+ Epistylis anastatica is
very similar in all characters except of the smooth stalk. Opercularia nutans (EHRENBERG, l83l) STEIN,
1854, which also possesses an annulated stalk, occurs rarely on cyclopids, has a semicircular, transversely ar-
ranged macronucleus, and the contractile vacuole is in mid-body at the dorsal wall of the vestibulum (detailed
description, see FOISSNER et al. 1992c, p. 176).3,4 (contractile vacuole at ventral wall of vestibulum), 6, 7, 8
are key characters for identification.
523

Peritrichia
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Found by EHRENBERG (1838), KENT (1881), and D'UDEKEM (1864) on
freshwater cyclopids, for which it is very likely a specific epibiont, sometimes covering the host almost com-
pletely (MATTHES 1950). Usually, E. digitalis is attached to the fourth thoracal legof Eucyclops setulatus; oc-
casionally, the abdomen, the furca, the rostrum, and/or the antennae are also colonized. SOMMER (195 1; with-
out illustration) observed Epistylis digilalis on mites from the littoral of a eutrophic lake (Großer Plöner See) in
Germany. FOISSNER et al. (1992c) found it with high abundance on Cyclops from a polluted section (SI = 2.87)
of the Vils River in Bavaria (Fig. I 1-26). Epiphytic records unreliable, Iikely caused by confusion with Opercu-
laria nutans (-+ similar species). Further records: once on Cyclops agilis in Lake Ohrid, Macedonia (GREEN
1960, with illustration); on Canthocampus in ponds and ox-bows and in a mine in Germany (SCHMIDT 1916,
WETZEL 1929); oxidation pond (BUCK 1968); betamesosaprobic water body in CzechoslovatAa 1SRÄUEI(-
HUSEK 1957); on Eucyclops serrulatus from the potamoplankton of the (oligotrophic?) Kuban River, USSR
(KORNIYENKO 1972); on Cyclops from a forest pond near Buffalo, USA, in April (KELLICOTT 1884, 1887).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Very likely feeds on bacteria. Biomass of 106 specimens about 30
mg (FOISSNER et al. 1992c). Occasionally, the oligosaprobic rotifer Pleurotrocha petromyzon attaches its eggs,
which are larger than the extended zooids, on the stalks of the colonies (EHRENBERG 1838). Not very
common, so far recorded from Eurasia only. Epizoic on cyclopids. Saprobic classification according to FOISS-
NER et al. (1992c): oligosaprobic to betamesosaprobic (o = 5, b = 5, I = 3, SI = 1.5).
E-
P
'-pr1
,-p
fZ
Epistylis digitalis (1, f)om EHRENBERG llJ3tl; 2,.1,6, 7, lionr KENT luttl; 3, tl'onr KAHL I93-5;5, fl'orn D'UDEKEM 1864; tt, tiom JIR-
OVEC et al.. 1953; 10, from LOM 1964. l-9, in vivo; 10, protargol impregnation). l, 5, 6, 8: Colonies, up to 1.6 mm, ? pm, 300 pm, 240
pm high. 2: Contracted specimen. 3, 4: Extended zooids, 80 pm, 120 pm. 7: Swarmer with aboral ciliary wreath (anow). 9: Small colony on
Cyclops.l0: Vestibularportion of oral ciliature. CV = contractile vacuole, § = germinal kinety, MA = macronucleus, PQ = psristomial col-
lar, PD = peristomial disc, PE = polykinety which forms three peniculi (PEl-3) in the vestibulum, UM = undulating membrane.
524

Peritrichia
Epistylis digitalis (1lom FOISSNER et al. 1992c. 11, l4 16, in vivo bligl.rt Iield nricroglaphs; 12, protalgol impregnation; 13, scanniug elec-
tron micrograph). 1.1, 13: Colonies on the posterior thoracal extremity and the furca of Cyclops (arrows). l2z Epistylis digitalis has a well-
developed myoneme system (contractile fibres) consisting of a thick fibre bundle in the peristomial collar and many branched strands ex-
tending from the adoral ciliary spiral to the stalk (cp. Figures 21,22). 14-16: Colonies at higher magnification showing cylindrical body
shape, vestibular entrance (arrow in 14), annulation of stalk, and contractile vacuole at ventral wall of vestibulum (15). The location of the
contractile vacuole (at ventral or dorsal wall of vestibulum) has to be checked in further populations (-+ taxonomy and character 4). CV =
contractile vacuole, MY = myonemes.
525

Peritrichia
Epßtylß digitalis (fiom FOISSNER et al. 1992c. 17, 18, in vivo bright lield rnicrographs; 19,20, 2-5,26, scarrrrir.rg electron nricrographs;
2l-24, protargol impregnation). 17: Extended zooids. Arrow marks coarse, transverse striation of pellicle. 18-20,252 The stalk of E. digi-
rairs is dichotomously branched and conspicuously annulated. 2lr22tMyoneme system and ciliature (cp. Figure 12). The large, dark spheres
are endoparasitic suctorians. KELLICOTT (1887) observed another, ectoparasitic species, viz., Podophrya flexllis, which is very likely a
junior synonym of Tokophrya carchesii (FOISSNER et al. 1995). 23,24: Proximal portion of oral ciliature (cp. Figure l0). 26: Transverse
striation of pellicle. AW = anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, MY = myonemes (contractile fibres), PE1-3 = peniculi.
526

Peritrichia
Epistylis procumbe ns aACHARTAS, 1 8e7
1897 Epistylis procumbens ZACHARIAS, ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 5: 7.
1897 Epistylis rotans §VgC, Bull. int. Acad. tch6que Sci.,4:44 (synonym).
1933 Epistylis rotans SVEC - GAJEWSKAJA, Zoologica,32: ll0 (illustrated record).
1935 Epistylis rotans SVEC, 1891 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 689 (revision).
1940 Epistylis rotans SVEC - STILLER, Arch. Hydrobiol., 36: 269 (illustrated record).
1952 Epistylis rotans SVEC - WESENBERG-LUND, Plankton, p. 65 (illustrated record).
1956 Epistylisrotans SVEC-NIPKOW, Schweiz. Z.Hydrol.,18: 161 (biology andecology).
1992 Epistylis procumbens ZACHARIAS, 1897 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte
des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192: 221 ("Ciliate-At1as", that is, taxonomic and ecologi-
cal monograph).
Nomenclature
SVEC (1897, p. 44) mentioned that the paper by ZACHARIAS (1897) was available earlier than his own study;
thus, the species has to be ascribed to ZACHARIAS.
Differential diagnosis
1) Extended zooids in vivo 6O-140 pm, usually about 100 pm long, length 2-2.5 times width, conspicuously
slender because posterior portion narrowed stalk-like (Fig. 17, 19,21).
2) Extended zooids of irregular, often roughly sigmoidal shape, anterior portion usually nodding. posterior nar-
rowed stalk-like (Fig. 1, 4, 12, 11 , 19, 2l ). Contracted specimens pyriform and distinctly folded (annulated)
in posterior half (Fig. 2,12,13,20,22-24).
3) Macronucleususuallyintransverseaxisandanteriorhalf of zooid,reniformtosemicircular(Fig. 1,6, 13,21,
33,34). Micronucleus at anterior end of macronucleus, conspicuous after silver impregnation (Fig. 33, 3a).
4) Contractile vacuole at level of peristomial collar on dorsal wall of vestibulum (Fig. 9, 19, 21).In SVBC's
original figure (Fig. 13) and some redescriptions (Fig. 12) at ventral wall of vestibulum, very likely due to
misobservation.
s) Pellicle with atotal of about 137 indistinct, narrow transverse striae (silverlines; Fig.24,35:62-80 (mean =
73.4, SD = 3.1 , CY = 5.1 7o, n = 26) silverlines from anterior end to anlage of aboral ciliary wreath and
52-80 (mean = 63.5, SD = 6.3, CV = 9.9 Vo, n = l7) from aboral ciliary wreath to stalk (scopula). Do not con-
fuse pellicular striation with widely spaced annulae in contracted zooids (Fig.22-25).
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar thin and wider than body proper, that is, dis-
tinctly projecting. Peristomial disc flat or slightly convex and + obliquely raised in feeding specimens. Vesti-
bulum oblique and short, that is, about 113 of body length (Fig. a, 19, 2l). Ciliary pattern without
peculiarities, except for a short basal body row at distal end of adoral ciliary spiral (Fig. 33 , 34).
7) Stalk dichotomously branching, acontractile (myoneme lacking), surface smooth but with distinct transverse
lines marking presumptive separation sites (see character 8; Fig. 3, 12, 15,18,26-31).
8) Colonies middle-sized, up to 1 mm long, consist of 25 zooids on average, roundish in cross-section (not fan-
shaped as in -+ Epicarchesium pectinatum); central zooids divide more frequently than outer ones causing
umbrella-like shape of colonies. Early summer colonies usually small, midsummer colonies large with up to
80 zooids. In ripe colonies, the oldest branches separate at pre-formed sites (Fig. 14,26-31 , arrows), forming
small offspring (similar as in -+ Epicarchesium pectinatum). Euplanktonic, colonies usually swim with stalk
directed forward, rarely backwards, slowly rotating about longitudinal axis (Fig. 5, 12, 14, 15*21).
527

Peritrichia
Similar species
Easy to identify. -> Epicarchesium pectinatumhas a contractile stalk and fan-shaped, flat colonies. Pelagic vorti-
cellids (--> Pelagovorticella mayeri, -+ P. natans) are solitary and have a contractile stalk. 2, J ,8 are key charac-
ters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in the summer plankton of lakes and ponds, but also in large running wa-
ters, prefers the warm season. Euplanktonic, however, drifted colonies may occur in the littoral aufwuchs and the
outlet of lakes (BICK 1972a). Loci classici are a lake (Großer Plöner See) in Germany and a pond in Czechoslova-
kia, where ZACHARIAS (1897), respectively, §VnC I1SOZ) discovered E. procumbens in the summer plankton.
In a Newfoundland lake, DAVIES (1973; substantiated by micrographs) counted up to 34 colonies l-r,
respectively,243 zooidsl-r in the 0-2m layer in mid-September; during late October, he observed the last colo-
nies. Furthermore, DAVIES (1978) found a maximum of 102 colonies I I in the August plankton of a lake in Lab-
rador. GAJEWSKAJA (1933) observed E. procumbezs predominantly in warm areas of Lake Baikal (-+ Table).
Conversely, STILLER (1940) found it during early September only in the cool water of the open area of the locus
classicus, that is, the Großen Plöner See. In a lake (Müggelsee) near Berlin, the mean abundance from April to Oc-
tober increased from about 3 ind. l-r in the eutrophic period 1908-1913 to 113 ind. l-r in the hypertrophic period
1919-1990. During the first period only one maximum was observed in early summer, whereas the second period
showed an additional maximum in late summer. ARNDT et al. (1993) suggested that the rise was due to the food
organisms which increased their numbers several times, while potential predators (especially copepods) increased
only about twice. However, ARNDT et al. (1993) very likely confused E. procumbers with -+ Epicarchesium
pectinatum because they mention that "the ability to retract the stalk when in contact with potential predators may
increase their survival time". We found E. procumbens in a lake (Höglwörther See) in Bavaria (Fig. 15-35).
There are many records (most not substantiated by illustrations) which are very likely correct because E. procum-
bens is easily identified (but see ARNDT above). Oligotrophic water bodies: Bavarian and Latvian lakes (GUHL
1987, LIYEPA 1984b); oligo- to mesotrophic lake in France (AMBLARD et al. 1993, 1994); 68 zooids l-r in Lake
Onega (USSR) during summer stagnation (MAZHEIKAITE 1969). Mesotrophic water bodies: Danish lake dur-
ing July and August (WESENBERG-LUND 1952); oligo- to mesosaprobic reservoir in Germany (NUSCH 1970);
dominant in Lake Constance, Germany, during late summer (MÜLLER et al. 1991, SCHWEIZER 1994; further
details, see next chapter); mesotrophic lake (Mondsee) in Austria (SALBRECHTER & ARNDT 1994);22000
zooids 1-r in the 4 m July plankton of a Swiss lake (Lauerzersee; ODERMATT 1970); dimictic, meso- to eutrophic
reservoir in Southem Bohemia (MACEK 1994). Eutrophic water bodies: sometimes dominant in eutrophic lakes
of France (AMBLARD et al. 1994, SIME-NGANDO & HARTMANN 1991); dammed river, bog lake (pH 5.0),
small lake (from late April to early August with up to 2360 zooids 1-r in June) and betamesosaprobic pond in Ger-
many (BEUSCHOLD 1961, MIEGEL 1982, RECK 1987, VÖLKER 1964); Meerfelder Maar, a eu- to polytrophic
lake of volcanic origin in Germany (PACKROFF 1992, PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991); up to 524 zooids l-r
(annual mean 44 ind. I r) in a eutrophic lake (Belauer See) of Germany (ZIMMERMANN 1994); lake (Pfäffiker-
see) in Switzerland (MESSIKOMMER 1952); up to 25 zooids I 1 in a Polish lake during August (STRZELEKI &
PÖLTORAK 1971); highly eutrophic lake in Scandinavia (THUNMARK 1945); cooling pond of Chemobyl Nu-
clear Power station, Ukraine (MOVCHAN & PROTASOV 1986); 113 zooids 1-r in a betamesosaprobic reservoir
during June, and in other reservoirs of the USSR (KRAVCHENKO 1969, MAMAEVA 1976a, MYLNIKOVA
1992b, ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992); pond in the USSR from June to September, with up to 8000 zooids m2 in
July (RYLOV 1924); lake in China (SHEN & GU 1965); paddy field in Japan (TAKAHASHI & SUHAMA
1991); abundant (up to 180 mm3 m-') in a lake of Georgia, USA, during winter time (PACE 1982); oligotrophic
lake in Alaska, USA (RUBLEE & BETTEZ 1995).
Records from the plankton of running waters: Volga River and Hungarian and Bulgarian section of Danube
River, including side branches (BERECZKY 1991, BERECZKY et al. 1983, KURASCHOYA 1961, NAIDE-
NOW 1962, NOSEK & BERECZKY 1981); Cävado River, Portugal (CERQUEIRA DA SILVA 1992 peri-
phytic colonies possibly drifted from upstream reservoirs); oligo- to betamesosaprobic running waters in Yugo-
528

Peritrichia
slavia (PETKOVIÖ & PETKOVIÖ 1978); Pripyat River, Ukraine (NEBRAT 1992). Further records: Hamburg
harbour (BARTSCH & HARTWIG 1984); brackish lake in Yugoslavia (PETKOVIÖ & PETKOVTÖ tSA+);
freshwater bay of Caspian Sea (AGAMALIEV 1986).
Most records from activated sludge plants and trickling filters not substantiated by illustrations (e.g. KLIMO-
WICZ 1973), those documented (CURDS 1969, LIVINGSTON & WALKER 1992) are apparent misidentifica-
tions! MADONI et al. (1985) counted almost 200 ind. ml-r in a pilot plant and thus considered E. procumbens as
typical for mature sludge. We did not find E. procumbens in any of hundreds of activated sludge samples.
Autecological data: Feeds mainly on bacteria and small colourless flagellates, occasionally on organic debris
(BICK 7972a, BÜRGI et al. 1985). Biomass of 106live specimens according to FOISSNER et al. (1992c) 40 mg,
biomass of preserved cells 6 mg (AMBLARD et al. 1993), 8 mg (B@RSHEIM 1984, BÜRGI et al. 1985), 14 mg
(SrME-NGANDO & HARTMANN 1991), 24 ms (MÜLLER 1989, SCHWEIZER 1994), 45 mg (NESTER-
ENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991), ard97 mg (AMBLARD et al. 1994); this extreme range indicates calculation
errors and/or misidentification. MÜLLER (1989) reported the following ecological data from a Lake Constance
population: generation time about 65 h under natural conditions at 8.5" C; mean abundance in 0-20 m 157 ind. l-r
and 121 ind. l-r in l98l and 1988; mean biovolume 3.77mm3 m-3 and 3.05mm3m-3; potential production
0.9 mm3 m-3 d-r and 0.8 mm3 m-3 d-r. Filtration rate 0.23-1.26 pl ind. I hr for 0.57 pm and 1.04 pm sized, mono-
dispersal, fluorescence latex-beads (BORSHEIM 1984). Specific filtration rate about 7 xl)a body volume h-r,
that is, about 3 mm-3 h-r (SHERR & SHERR 1987). Further autecological data -+ Table.
Epistylis procumbens occurs mainly during the summer months, although records from the cold season are
known (e.g., PACE 1982,ZACHARIAS 1900a). Resting cysts hibemate in the sediment and are transported in
the epilimnion during spring circulation (NIPKOW 1956). Cysts spherical, 4044 pm across, wall rdther thick,
colourless, surface with many roundish depressions and a small, cone-shaped tubercle, the former stalk attach-
ment site (scopula).
Table: Autecological data of Epistylis procumbens. Column 1, from GAJEWSKAJA (1933; many analyses from Lake Baikal); column 2,
from BICK (1912a; data from NUSCH 1969, that is, many analyses from an oligo- to betamesosaprobic reservoir in Germany); columns 3
and 4, from RECK (1987; many analyses from a small, eutrophic lake in Germany; column 3, total range, column 4, >1000 ind. I r).
Parameters References
.)
1 2 J 4
Temperature (" c) 9.5-22 t5-23 6-2t t4-tl
pH 7.2-1 .6 1.2-7.8
o, (mg l') I .t-tt.l B-1 0.6-tl 3.5-9
1
Oz (saturation 7o) 5-180 34-93
Coz (mg I') 0.6-2.5 0-6
l')
NH+*-N (mg 0-0. 1 5 0.03-0.18
Bacteria ml ' (x 10u; direct counts) r-3
Additional autecological data: B@RSHEIM (1984) found E. procumbens in0-l2 m of a Norwegian lake at more
than 80 Eo oxygen saturation. RYLOV (1924) usually observed it at >14 C. Ratio of phosphorus to nitrogen in
excretion products about 1:3 (BOWNIK-DYLINSKA 1981). LDsg for copper 1 mg 1-' (GONZALEZ-PALACIOS
et al. 1991). Growing rate of stalk about 24 pmh-r. Occasionally, planktonic rotifers attach their eggs to the
stalk of the colonies, possibly to keep them in the uppermost, warm and oxygenated strata (NIPKOW 1956).
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded only from Eurasia. Euplanktonic and very common in lakes, ponds, and
Iarge running waters. Prefers temperatures >10" C, thus occurring mainly during the warm seasons. Indicates high
numbers of free bacteria, that is, eutrophic conditions, when abundant. Resting cysts known. Saprobic classifica-
tion according to FOISSNER et al. (1992c): oligosaprobic to betamesosaprobic (o = 5, b = 5, I = 3, SI = 1.5).
529

Peritrichia
PC
*m
CV
I
Epistylis procwnbens in vivo (1, 2, ll'onr ZACHARIAS 1891;3-5, tiorn KAHL l9-j5; 6 10, l'rom STILLL,R 1940; I l, 13,
from SVEC 1897 12, from GAJEWSKAJA 1933; 14, from FOISSNER et al. 1992c). Epistylis procumbens is a conspicuous
species, easily identified by the euplanktonic, colonial mode oflife and the acontractile stalks. Colonies duplicate by separat-
ing at preformed sites of the stalk (Fig. 3,26-31). 1, 2: Extended and contracted zooid, size not given in original description.
3: Stalk with presumptive separation site (arrow) and fine longitudinal striation (cp. Figures 28,30).4, 13: Parts ofcolonies.
5,ll^rtzr 14: Colonies. Small arrows in (14) mark projecting peristomial collar, large arrows denote presumptive separation
sites of statk. 6-10: Variability of size and shape of zooids, 60-140 pm. c = contracted zooid, CV = contractile vacuole (at
level of peristomial collar or even in peristomial disc; cp. Figures 19, 21), MA = macronucleus, PC = peristomial collar, PD
= peristomial disc.
530

Peritrichia
:.t*t:
:, .:,_ 14 ': :. ': 1!.. :, ; ., ..! :t; .r: .,. : . .,: . , : e.
::_:.:l:t ,, .,,
:tt n
.§,S
r.'
Epistylis procuntbens, in vivo bright field (15, 17,20) and interlelencc contrast (16, lt3, l9) miclographs (originals oIa population li'orn a
lake [Höglwörther See] in Bavaria). 15: Small and large colony. Dark transverse lines (arrows), the presumptive separation sites of the
stalks, are recognizable even at low magnification. L6: Medium-sized colony. Arrow denotes swimming direction. 17, 20: Same colony
with extended and contracted zooids. 18, 19: Same colony at low and high magnification. Arrows in (18) mark presumptive separation sites
p(
of stalk, arrow in ( I 9) marks vestibular entrance. CV = contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuoles, = peristomial collar.
531

Peritrichia
Epistylis procumDezs (originals of a population fiom a lake [Höglwörther See] in Bavaria. 21, in vivo; 22 25,SEM nricrographs). 2l: Palt
of a large colony. 22--24: Contracted zooids are pyriform. Note annulated posterior portion. Widely spaced annulae (large arrows) are caused
by the intense contraction of the posterior third of the cell. Small arrows mark ordinary pellicular striae, corresponding to the silverlines (Fig.
35). 25: Cells are frequently covered by fuzzy malerial (25). CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus.
532

Peritrichia
Epistytis procumbens (originats of a population t}om a lake [Höglwörther See] in Bavaria. 26-28, in vivo, intert'erence contrast
micrographs; 29, silver carbonate impregnation; 30, 31, scanning electron micrographs). 26-31: Stalk sfucture. Colonies of E. procumbens
duplicate by separating at argyrophilic (arrowhead in 29), highly refractile, preformed sites (arrows) of the stalk, which is, an in many other
Epistylis species, longitudinally striated (asterisk in 28). In the scanning electron microscope, the stalk surface appears reticulate, possibly
due to a mucous cover (30, 3 1).
533

Peritrichia
ffi4
Epistylis procumbens (originals ol a population fl'orn a lake [Höglwörther See] in Bavaria. 32-34, silver carbonate impreg-
nation; 35, Klein-Foissner silver nitrate impregnation). 32: Total view of a contracted zooid. The dark, transverse stripes are
not the silverlines, but alveoli between the silverlines. Arrowhead marks anlage of aboral ciliary wreath. 33r 34: Oral cilia-
ture and nuclear apparatus in contracted zooids. Arrowheads mark highly argyrophilic micronucleus. 35: Silverline system
in posterior body portion. Epistylis procumbens has 62-80 silverlines from the anterior end to the anlage of the aboral ciliary
wreath (arrowheads) and 52-80 from the anlage to the stalk attachment site (scopula). AC = adoral ciliary spiral, MA = mac-
ronucleus, UM = undulating membrane.
534

Peritrichia
Epistylis pygmeeurru (EHRENBERG, 1838) nov. comb.
17'73 Vorticella piriformis MÜLLER, Vermium Terrestrium et Fluviatilium, p. 115 (without illustration and
thus of doubtful identity).
1186 Vorticella pirformis - MÜLLER, Animalcula Infusoria, p. 307 (without illustration and thus of doubtful
identity).
1838 Carchesium pygmaeaz EHRENBERG, Infusionsthierchen, p. 291 (synonymy; illustration).
1852 Scyphidia pyrifurmis D. - PERTY, Kenntniss kleinster Lebensformen, p. 138 (illustrated record).
l88l Rhabdostyla ovum KENT, Manual infusoria II,p.664 (synonym according to KAHL 1935).
1922 Rhabdostyla ovum S. KENT 1882 - PENARD, Etrdes Infusoires, p.267 (redescription from life).
l93l Rhabdostyla ovum KENT - STILLER, Acta Litt. Scient. R. Univ. hung. Francisco-Josephina,2: 37 (de-
tailed description from life; transferredto Epistylis on p.40).
1935 Rhabdostyla (Scyphidia) pyrifurmis PERTY, 1852 * KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 678 (revision).
1942 RhabdosQla pyrffbrmis PERTY - STILLER, Arch. Hydrobiol. 38: 335 (redescription from life).
1942 Epistylis ovum (KENT) STILLER - STILLER, Arch. Hydrobiol., 38: 336 (illustrations from STILLER
193 1).
1954 Rhabdostyla pyrif'ormis PERTY - GELEI, Acta biol. hung. , 5: 340 (redescription from life).
1964 Rhabdostyla ovum KENT - LOM, Arch. Protistenk., l0l: 148 (silver impregnation of oral ciliature).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
The name used by MULLER (1773; "piriforznis") becomes a secondary homonym of Epistylis ,pyriformis
D'UDEKEM, 1864, if MÜLLER's species is transferred Lo Epistylis, because "i" is deemed to be identical with
"y" (Article 58 [11] of the ICZN 1985). According to Article 60 (b), the name of the oldest available synonym
becomes valid. This is very llkely Carchesium pygmaeum, as supposed by EHRENBERG (1838) himself, al-
though the identification is somewhat arbitrary because MÜLLER did not provide an illustration. Previously,
EHRENBERG identified this species as "young Epistylis anastatica", indicating that a stalk myoneme is lack-
ing.
"Rhabdostyla pyriformis" was invariably assigned to PERTY (1852), which is, however, incorrect because he
did not describe it as a new species, but simply transferred MÜLLER's species to Scyphidia, as proposed by DU-
JARDIN (1841). Synonymy of "Rhabdostyla pyrifurmis" and Rhabdostyla ovumKENT was already suggested
by KAHL (1935) and seems justified (at least from the morphological point of view), although KENT's popula-
tion was epiphytic, that is, not epizoic as almost all other records of Epistylis pygmaeum. Epistylis rotatorium
KAHL, 1935, Rhabdostyla ovoide, §RÄUBK-HUSEK, ßa6 Gig.26), R. cylindrica STILLER, 1935 (Fie.21),
and R. dubia FOISSNER, 1979b are very likely further synonyms of Epistylis pygmaeum.
Rhabdostyla was established for a solitary Epistylis species by KENT (1881). However, several studies
(EHRENBERG 1838, PENARD 1922, STILLER 1931b, own observations) showed that the present species, al-
though usually solitary, can make small colonies. Thus, it should be classified with Epistylis, as proposed by
STILLER (1942a), and also by EHRENBERG (1838) in that he classified it in the colonial genus Carchesium.
Epistylis pygmaeum is a very common epizooplanktonic species. Nevertheless, its morphology is not yet known
in detail. Thus, we provide some micrographs and main morphometrics (-+ Table) from two populations of Aus-
tria. They match EHRENBERG's description, figures, and hosts (cp. Figures 1-3 with 3V32), as well as the
relevant redescriptions (Fig. 8, 15, 20) and synonyms (Fig. 5, 26, 21) very well.
Differential diagnosis
l) Extended zooids in vivo 22*50 x 1745 pm, usually about 40 x 30 pm, that is, length about 1.3 times width
(Fig.5, 12,32).
535

Peritrichia
2) Extended zooids pyriform, goblet-shaped, or almost cylindrical, rarely slightly campanulate (Fig. 2, 5,8, 12,
23,21,28,30-32). Contracted specimens ellipsoidal to globular (Fig. 6, 9, l0).
3) Macronucleus in transverse axis of cell, roughly semicircular (Fig. 9, 13, 2l , 23 , 24).
4) Contractile vacuole slightly underneath peristomial collar at ventral wall of vestibulum (Fig. 8,15,11 ,32).
s) Pellicle with a total of about 30 rather distinct transverse striae (silverlines; Fig. 8, 32, 35, Table): 15-22
(usually about l9) silverlines from anterior end to anlage of aboral ciliary wreath and 10-14 (usually about
1 1) from aboral ciliary wreath to stalk (scopula).
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar distinctly narower to about as wide as body,
never distinctly projecting beyond body proper. Peristomial disc slightly convex and + obliquely raised in
feeding specimens. Vestibulum of usual size (Fig. 5,8, 11,29,32).
7) Stalk occasionally dichotomously branching, usually, however, unbranched (-+ character 8); acontractile
(myoneme lacking) and smooth, 2-5 ytm across and up to 7 times cell length, usually, however, distinctly
shorter than body (Fig. 2, 4, 5, 1-l l, 25, 30).
8) Usually solitary, colonies, if present at all, composed of only 2 or 3, rarely of up to 8 zooids (Fig. 2, 4, 5,7
,
11,31). Epibiontic on planktonic crustaceans and rotifers (Fig. 1-3, 25,30).
Table: Morphometric data from Epistylis pygmaeum. Upper line: population from Daphnio of a forest pond in Upper Austria; lower line:
population from Cyclolts of a fish pond in Upper Austria.
Characterr Mean M SD SE CV Min Max n
Body, length 10.9 41 5.7 t.6 t3.9 32 50 t2
32.5 30 4.8 1.1 t4.6 25 42 20
Body, width 32.1 32 5.1 1.5 t5.l 25 40 t2
29.2 29 4.6 1.0 t5.7 22 40 20
Silverlines from anterior end to aboral cili tB.l 18 t.2 0.3 6.3 t7 2l 20
ary wreath, number 19.1 20 2.2 0.s 1 1.3 15 22 20
Silverlines from aboral ciliary wreath to tt.9 t2 0.8 0.2 6.6 11 l4 20
scopula, number r 0.9 11 1.1 0.2 9.8 10 t3 20
Pellicular pores, number per 100 pm2 16. I t6 2.7 0.9 t6.6 T2 20 9
t1.r t4 4.5 t.6 3t.6 7 22 8
' Values from field specimens prepared with the Klein-Foissner silver nitrale method. Measurements in micrometres. CV = coefficient of
variation in o/o,M = median, Max = maximum, Mean = arithmetic mean, Min = minimum, n = number of specimens investigated, SD =
standard deviation, SE = standard error of mean.
Similar species
Easy to separate from other common epizooplanktonic Epistylis species (-+ E. anastatica, -+ E. digitalis), which
are distinctly larger (60-150 pm) and form conspicuous colonies. Difficult to distinguish from some (possibly
synonymous) Rhabdostyla species also attached to small crustaceans: R. dubia FOISSNER, 1979b (peristomial
disc umbilicate; 4-8 pellicular pores per 100 pm'zagainst 1-22 it Epistylis pygmaeum, -+ Table); R. invaginata
STOKES, 1886a (contractile vacuole at dorsal wall of vestibulum); R. ovoides §RÄVBK-UUSEK, 1946 (no dif-
ference; Fig.26); R. cyclopis KAHL, 1935 (= R. cyclopicola KAHL 1935; contractile vacuole at dorsal wall of
vestibulum). Rhabdostyla int'linans (MÜLLER, 1113) islarger (45-77 x3542 pm) and attached to oligochaetes
(detailed description, see FOISSNER et al. 1992c, p. 246). 1,4, 5 (peristomial disc slightly convex, not umbili-
cate), 8 (attached to crustaceans and rotifers) are key characters for identification.
s36

Peritrichia
E,cology
Occurrence and distribution: Common, probably mainly epizooplanktonic, that is, anached to planktonic crus-
taceans (cladocerans, copepods, ostracods) and rotifers; rarely epiphytic (other species?). The type location of
Epistylis pygmaeum is very likely in Berlin, Germany, where EHRENBERG (1838) discovered it on daphnids,
on the gills of mayfly larvae, and on rotifers. The locus classicus of the synonym Rhabdostyla ovum is the neigh-
bourhood of Stoke Newington, London, England, where KENT (1881) discovered it in some abundance on
aquatic plants from a pond. MÜLLER 11113, 1186) found,"Vorticella pirformis" in Denmark attached to Daph-
nia.
Further records documented by illustrations: on Daphnia and Cyclops from a forest pond and a fish pond in Up-
per Austria, and in some Austrian lakes, peaking during spring (our observations, Fig. 30-35, Table); attached
to Daphnia in Czechoslovakian waters (LOM 1964, §RÄUBK-UUSEK 1957); attached to Daphnia hyalina
and Fragilaria in a German lake (Großer Plöner See) during winter (SOMMER 1951); attachedto Daphnia
(solitary and colonial) and Cyclops (only solitary) in stagnant water bodies of Hungary, for example, flood
ponds (STILLER 1931b, 1942a); attached to Brachionus from Italian freshwater (CANELLA 1954); on the
dorsal side of Cyclops from the Swiss Alps (PERTY 1852); attached to ostracods in stagnant water bodies near
Geneva, Switzerland (ROUX l90l); on rotifers and planktonic crustaceans in Swiss water bodies (PENARD
1922); attached to the posterior end of the rotifer Brachionus in ponds of the Hungarian mountains (GELEI
1954); on plants, ostracods, and rotifers in stagnant water bodies of Spain (BUISÄN 1944); temporary and per-
manent water bodies in the Kara-Kum desert, Asia (BRODSKY 1929); in large numbers attached to the ap-
pendages of Cyclops collected from a pond in Nanking, China, during late February (WANG & NIE 1933);
freshwater on Tibetan Plateau (SHEN 1983); gutter water in India (NAIDU 1965; substrate not mentioned,
identification doubtful).
Records not documented by illustrations: rain water puddles in central Europe (SPANDL 1926); attached to ani-
mals and plants in Bavarian freshwaters (BIEGEL 1954); on crustaceans from Belgium waters (BERVOETS
1940); Nitra River, Czechoslovakia (HANU§KA 1962); attached, to Cyclops from a lake (Obersee) in Esthonia
(SCHNEIDER 1909); on average 14 specimens per Bosmina, and on Daphnia, Ceriodaphnia, and rotifers of a
eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Germany (HAMMANN 1952); on Cyclops and attached to the lorica
of the peritrich ciliate Cothurnia from Lake Balaton, Hungary (STILLER l94l); on rotifers from freshwater and
brackish waters in The Netherlands (VERSCHAFFELT 1930); throughout the year on cyclopids and ostracods
from various stagnant water bodies near Basle, Switzerland (KEISER 1921); profundal (12-139 m) of a large
lake (Neuenburgersee) in Switzerland (MONARD 1920); Swiss freshwaters during winter and summer
(BOURQUIN-LINDT 1919; further old records from Switzerland, see ANDRE 1912); periphyton of a reservoir
in the USSR (MYLNIKOVA 1981); saline lakes in central Asia (GURWITSCH 1934); eutrophic lake in China
during winter and summer (GONG 1986); in the periphyton of a Chinese lake (SHEN 1980); on legs and gills of
gammarids from Lake Baikal (GAJEWSKAJA 1933); on cladocerans and Cyclops in Colorado, USA (HAMIL-
TON r943).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds mainly on bacteria. Biomass of 106 specimens 20 mg (our
calculations). Reliably recorded from Europe and Asia only. Common epibiont of planktonic crustaceans and ro-
tifers, possibly preferring the cold seasons, when the hosts moult less frequently and live longer.
531

Peritrichia
6
PC
I
MA
15i
10
18
Pr1
UM
I
I
I\,,
2e\
27 ,/
Epistylispygmaeun(l-3, fiomEHRENBERG 1838;4,fiomPERTY 1852;5,6, tiomKENT 1882;7-ll,iiomSTILLER l9-llbi l2, liom
WANG & NIE 1933; 13-16, from GELEI 1954; 17, 18, from PENARD 1922; 19-22, from STILLER 1942a; 23-25, from SRÄ-
MEK-HUSEK 1951; 26, from SRÄMEK-HU§EK 1946; 27, from STILLER 1935; 28, from SOMMER 1951; 29, from LOM 1964. l-12,
15-28, in vivo; 13, mercury chloride fixation; 29,protargol impregnation). 1-3: Specimens attached to planktonic rotifers, about 22pmlong
(cp. Figure 30). 4, 5, 8,12-15,19-23,282 Solitary specimens, 4 = 3644 pm (including stalk), 5 = 50 pm, 8 = ? pm, 12 = 25-30 pm, 13-15
=25pm, 19-22=25-30pm,23=34 lm,28=21-29 trrm.6: Contractedspecimen.7,9-II,17: Smallcolonies, 17 =28pm.16: Swarmer
attached to host by aboral ciliary wreath. 18: The stalk of E. pygmaeum is usually shorter than the body. 24: Polar view showing macronu-
cleus. 25: Specimens attached to Daphnia.26, 27: Supposed synonyms, viz., Rhabdostyla ovoides (28-34 pm) and R. cylindrica (25 pm).
29: Vestibular portion of oral ciliature. CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus, PC = peristomial collar, PD = peristomial disc, PE1
= peniculus 1, UM = undulating membrale.
538

Peritrichia
3ü
,w:
,ff..,)i.§f'fNi,i'
s4 s5
Epistylis pygntaeum \30 -32, originals ol a population fiorn a eutropl.ric lake IWallersee] in Salzburg, Austria; 33-35, originals of a popula-
tion from a forest pond in Upper Austria. 3G-32, in vivo; 33-35, Klein-Foissner silver nitrate impregnation). 30: Planktonic rotifer colonized
by several specimens of E. pygmaeum (cp. Figures l-3).31,32: Extended, solitary specimens attached to rotifers. Arrow in (31) marks short
stalk. Note coarse striation of pellicle. 33-35: Epistylis pygmaeum has 15-22 silverlines from the anterior end to the aboral ciliary wreath
and 10-14 lines from the aboral wreath to the stalk (scopula). AW = anlage ofaboral ciliary wreath, CV = contractile vacuole, PC = peristo-
mial collar, S = scopula, SS = silverline system.
539

Peritrichia
O phry dium eutrophicum FoISSNER, l e7e
1979 Ophrydium eutophiczrn FOISSNER, Ber. Nat.-Med. Ver. Salzbure,3l4:95.
1984 Ophrydium eutrophicuru FOISSNER, 1979 - FOISSNER, ADAM & FOISSNER, Ber. Nat.-Med. Ver.
Salzburg., l:44 (detailed description from life and after silver impregnation and comparison with -+ O.
versatile).
1992 Ophrydium eutrophiczrz FOISSNER, 1979 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte
des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192:239 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecologi-
cal monograph).
D i f f e r e n t t al d i a g n o s i s
l) Extended zooids in vivo 250-350 x 2540 pm, length approximately 10 times width (Fig. l, 7). Fully con-
tracted specimens usually <100 pm long.
2) Extended zooids very slenderly vase-shaped, anterior end conspicuously cephalized, that is, distinctly set off
from body proper due to very prominent peristomial disc (Fig. 1, 7, 9). Contracted specimens almost
globular, ellipsoidal, or cylindrical, depending on extent of contraction (Fig. I 3).
3) Macronucleus in longitudinal axis of cell, filiform (Fig. I , 2).
4) Contractile vacuole in mid-body, with long canal extending anteriorly to dorsal wall of vestibulum (Fig. 1).
s) Cells green due to many 4-6 pm-sized symbiotic algae, often absent in posterior portion (Fig. l, 9, I 1). Pelli-
cle with >200 fine transverse striae (Fig. 1, 1l).
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar 40-45 pm across, that is, slightly to distinctly
projecting beyond body proper. Peristomial disc conspicuously high and thus very prominent (difference to
--> O. versatile), almost flat and + obliquely raised in feeding specimens. Vestibulum about l16-l15 of body
length. Adoral ciliary spiral and undulating membrane (haplokinety) describe 2.5 turns on peristomial disc
before plunging into vestibulum (Fig. 1*5, 8, 9).
7) Stalk dichotomously branching within gelatinous matrix of colony, acontractile (myoneme lacking) but flexi-
ble, surface smooth, very hyaline and only about 5 pm across, in large colonies several times as long as a
zooid(Fig. 1, 6, ll).
8) Zooids embedded in gelatinous matrix (jelly), colonies rather firm and nearly spherical, up to 5 cm across,
green due to symbiotic algae of zooids (Fig. 6). Individual cells live in peripheral chambers of jelly, which
are roundish or hexagonal in top view and inhabited by I or 2 specimens (Fig. 1, 7, l2).Extended zooids pro-
trude by about one half from gelatinous matrix (Fig. 7). Colonies usually attached to various substrates, espe-
cially macrophytes, sometimes dislodged and then planktonic or rolling on the lake bottom.
Similar species
Macroscopically inseparable from the more common -+ Ophrydium versatile with which it was probably some-
times confused. Microscopically, however, unequivocally distinguishable from this species by the much more
conspicuous oral apparatus with a longer adoral ciliary spiral on the peristomial disc (2.5 tums in O. eutrophicum
versus 1.5 irt -+ O. versatile; cp. Figures 9 and l0). The largest colonies of other Ophrydium species are dis-
tinctly smaller (few millimetres across) and the zooids lack symbiotic green algae, except those of -+ O. nau-
manni (extended zooids less than 100pm long, euplanktonic, colonies with 2-5 zooids only) and O. adae
EVARTS, 1880, which is very likely a junior synonym of -+ O. versatile (WINKLER & CORLISS 1965). 5
(many symbiotic green algae),6 (anterior end separated head-like from body proper),8 (makes large colonies)
are key characters for identification.
510

Peritrichia
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: As yet found only at type location, viz., the eutrophic littoral of two pre-alpine
lakes (Wallersee, near the village of Seekirchen; Fuschlsee) in Salzburg, Austria; it occurred also in another
eutrophic lake (Mattsee) of this region (FOISSNER 1979e, FOISSNER et al. 1984). In the Wallersee it was so
abundant during August that if formed slimy masses in the supra-littoral (FOISSNER 1979e). The green, gelati-
nous colonies were attached to submerged stems of Phragmites, to leaves of stoneworts, and to mud-covered
stones. Large colonies were dislodged by waves and found in the pelagial or rolling on the sediment; such colo-
nies often had a breakthrough at their previous attachment site (Fig. 6).
Autecologicat data and ecological summary: Feeds on bacteria. Biomass of 106 specimens about 215 mg
(FOISSNER et al. 1992c); however, it is very likely more accurate to weigh the colonies (-+ O . versati /e). As yet
only recorded from eutrophic lakes near Salzburg, Austria. Possibly not as rare as indicated by its late discovery
because probably sometimes misidentified as the more common -+ Ophrydium versatile or not identified to spe-
cies level. Further ecological data are necessary from reliably identified populations. Saprobic classification ac-
cording to FOISSNER et al. (1992c): betamesosaprobic to alphamesosaprobic (o = 1, b = 6, a = 3,I = 3, SI =
2.2).
PD
I
PC
V
G
UM
PE2
PE1
PE3
-CV
MA
...::iii:iii::
*.i.{:ilIIiii.
..'ri'::
Pt}-;ii,iiir.i.,iilr-:rrt
-Ml
,iit
"tt':j' "t 4
2
Ophrydium eutrophicum (l -5, ll'onr FOISSNER et al. 1984. l, in vivo;2-5, protargol impregnation). 1: Extended specimen in hexagonal
jelly chamber,280 pm. Note the thick (cephalized) peristomial disc which bears 2.5 turns ofthe adoral ciliary spiral (cp. Figure 9).2: Oral
and somatic ciliature and nuclear apparatus of a contracted specimen, 125 pm. Details of proximal portion of oral ciliature, see Figures 4, 5.
3: Anterior polar view of oral ciliature and contractile apparätus (myonemes) of a swarmer, 50 pm across. 4, 5: Vestibular portion of oral
ciliature. AW = anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, CV = contractile vacuole with long canal emptying at dorsal wall of vestibulurl, 6 = germi-
nal kinety from which the new oral apparatus develops, J = gelatinous chamber, MA = filiform macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, MY =
myonemes (contractile fibres), PC = peristomial collar, PD = peristomial disc, PEl-3 = peniculi (adoral membranelles), SA = symbiotic
green algae, ST = acontractile stalk, UM = undulating membrane, V = vestibulum (l), and vestibular entrance (3).
54t

I)cril rrc lr rlr
ffi
ffi
,,fu%
.?'i*'.
;+{$ffi;!,-+,{.-ffi. i.: ....;r.::::::r:"..r,.'
I tfia-w?lr+w:.
ffi
'&*'ti;.,
::i1.4-l:.
WM:..,.:.:.ffi
WE
WW§t
Wtr:ffiiffi
'..qn",tW*;si@,, :.4r,ri**,".,,,,,)
,,,'e_ ,.:i rl::'W ij f::!. f! irW, + ä.a :. 't l a-. t. "
Ophrydiumeutrophicum (6, 12, liontFOISSNER 1979el.l-l I, I3,fiomFOISSNERetal. l9tl4, 1992c.6,1,9-l2,invivo;tl, l3,plorargol irn-
pregnation). 6: About 2.5 cm sized colony with breakthrough at previous attachment site. 7: Almost completely extended zooids. 8: Anterior
portion showing distal end (arrow) of adoral ciliary spiral and its following 2 tums (arrowheads) on the peristomial disc. 9: Anterior portion of
extended zooid. The peristomial disc is conspicuously set off (cephalized) from the body proper because occupied by 2.5 turns (arrows) of the
adoral ciliary spiral, as opposed to 1.5 turns found in --> O. versatile (Fig. l0). 11: Posterior portion of zooid showing fine striation of pellicle
and stalk. 12: Top view of colony showing that chambers are inhabited by one or two zooids. 13: Contractile (myoneme) system. Arrow marks
stalk attachment site, arrowheads denotes anlage of aboral ciliary wreath. PC = peristomial collar, SA = symbiotic algae, ST = stalk.
542

Peritrichia
Ophrydium versatile ia.r,ürrr;R, 1786) EHRENBERG, 1830
1786 Vorticella versatilis UÜt-f-BR, Animalcula Infusoria, p. 281.
1830 Ophrydiumversatile - EHRENBERG, Abh. dt. Akad. Wiss. Berl., year 1830: 41 (combining author).
1838 Ophrydium versatile (MÜLLER. l736) - EHRENBERG, Infusionsthierchen, p. 293 (revision).
1922 Ophrydium versarile (O.F. MÜLLER) EHRENB. 1838 - PENARD, Etudes Infusoires, p.279 (morphol-
ogy and biology).
1935 Ophrydium yersatile MÜLLER, 1786 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 755 (revision).
1962 Ophrydium versatile O. F. MÜLLER - LIEBMANN, Handbuch der Frischwasser- und Abwasser-Biologie
I, p. 480 (saprobic characterization).
1965 Ophrydium versarile (o. F. MÜLLER, 1786) EHRENBERG, 1838 - WINKLER & CORLISS, Trans. Am.
microsc. Soc., 84: 127 (redescription from life and comparison with other Ophrydium species).
1977 Ophrydium versatile O. F. MÜLLER 1786 - WILBERT, Arch. Protistenk., ll9: 54 (redescription from
life and after silver impregnation).
1984 Ophrydium versatile (o. F. MÜLLER, 1786) - FOISSNER, ADAM & FOISSNER, Ber. Nat.-Med. Ver.
Salzburg, T:46 (redescription from life and after silver impregnation and comparison with -+ O. eutro-
phicum).
1985 Ophrydium versatile MÜLLER, 1186 - GUHL, Arch. Protistenk., 129 136 (incomplete revision).
*
1992 Ophrydium versatile (MUELLER, 1786) EHRENBERG, 1830 FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN,
Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192:. 232 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is,
taxonomic and ecological monograph).
1994 Ophrydium versatile - BÜCKER & HAUSMANN, Mikrokosmos, 83: 21 I (morphology and biology).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
BORY DE SAINT VINCENT in LAMOUROUX et al. (1824) established the genus Ophrydia; however, the modi-
fied spelling "Ophrydium" by EHRENBERG (1830) prevailed. In the past century, several botanists described and
named the colonies of O. versatile as algae, obviously because of the large size and green colour. Ophrydium versa-
,i/e sensu HAUSMANN & OSTWALD (1987) is O. hyalinum WRZESNIOWSKI, l8ll, as redescribed by FOISS-
NER (1989). KAHL (1935) did not separate O. hyalinum from O. versatile; thus, we do not show KAHL's figure,
which is a redrawing of WRZESNIOWSKI's illustration. Ophrydium yersatile is well-known and has also been in-
vestigated ultrastructurally (e.g., GOFF & STEIN 1981, WILLEY & WALKOSZ 1915).
Di lferential diagnosis
l) Extended zooids in vivo 300-600 x 2040 pm, length approximately l0 times width (Fig. 2,3, 10, I 1). Fully
contracted specimens usually <100 pm long (Fig. 20).
2) Extended zooids very slenderly vase-shaped (Fig. 2,3,70, 11,26). Contracted specimens almost globular,
ll,
ellipsoidal or cylindrical, depending on extent of contraction (Fig. 2, 20).
3) Macronucleus in longitudinal axis of cell, filiform, 2.54.5 pm across (Fig.2,3,7 , l5).
4) Contractile vacuole slightly above mid-body, with long canal extending anteriorly to dorsal wall of vestibu-
lum (Fig. 2-4).
s) Cells green due to many 2.5-5 pm-sized symbiotic algae, often absent in posterior portion (Fig. 2,3, 10, 1 1,
14,26). Pellicle with a total of about 240 fine transverse striae (silverlines; Fig. 24, 16): 160-200 (mean =
180) silverlines from anterior end to anlage of aboral ciliary wreath and 60-70 (mean = 63) from aboral cili-
ary wreath to stalk.
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, peristomial collar slightly projecting beyond body proper. Peri-
stomial disc of usual height (difference to -+ O. eutrophicum), almost flat, and + obliquely raised in feeding
543

Peritrichia
specimens. Vestibulum abott U6-ll5 of body length. Adoral ciliary spiral and undulating membrane (hap-
lokinety) describe 1.5 turns on peristomial disc before plunging into vestibulum (Fig. 2, 3,6,7,10, 17, 18,
and Fig. 10 by -+ O. eutophicum).
7) Stalk dichotomously branching within gelatinous matrix of colony, acontractile (myoneme lacking) but flexi-
ble, surface smooth, very hyaline and only about 5 pm across, in large colonies several times as long as a
lYlz,
zooid (Fig. 5, 14, 16).
8) Zooids embedded in gelatinous matrix (jelly), young colonies rather firm and globular, old ones flabby and
flattened, up to 15 cm across and then composed of about 1 million individuals making colonies green due to
the symbiotic algae (Fig. 1, 8, 9, 23). Zooids live in peripheral chambers of jelly, which are roundish or hex-
agonal in top view (Fig. 2, 3, l3). Extended specimens protrude by about one half from gelatinous matrix
(Fig. 2,3). Colonies usually attached to various substrates, especially macrophytes (Fig. 8, 19), sometimes
dislodged and then planktonic or rolling on the sediment.
Similar species
Macroscopically inseparable from -+ Ophrydium eutrophicurz. Microscopically, however, unequivocally distin-
guishable from that species by the less pronounced cephalization due to the shorter adoral ciliary spiral on the
peristomial disc (1.5 tums in O.versatile versus 2.5 inO. eutrophicum;cp. Figures 9 and 10 by --> O. eutrophi-
cum). The largest colonies of other Ophrydium species are distinctly smaller (few millimetres across) and the
zooids lack symbiotic green algae, except those of -) O. naumanni (extended zooids less than 100 pm long,
euplanktonic, colonies with 2-5 zooids only) and O. adae EVARTS, 1880, which is very likely a junior synonym
of O. versatile (WINKLER & CORLISS 1965). 5 (many symbiotic green algae), 6 (anterior end not especially
prominent), 8 (makes large, green colonies) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
KAHL (1935) did not separate the colourless O. hyalinum from the green O. versatile, thus very likely inducing
some misidentifications in the literature. This has to be considered especially for records from running waters,
where O. hyalinum and other colourless species are much more common than O. versatile.
Occurrence and distribution: Common and sometimes abundant in lakes, ponds. and bogs, occasionally in run-
ning waters. Throughout the year with maximum abundances usually in early summer and in autumn (e.g.,
BÜCKER & HAUSMANN 1994, WILBERT 1977).Th9 green, gelarinous colonies, especially small to middle-
sized ones, often develop around the stalk or filament of aquatic plants (e.g., Phragmites), with the result that
they later appear to be pierced by that material; other colonies are attached to submerged plants (e.g., Potamoge-
ton,roots, twigs), mussels, piles, stones, or other substrates (Fig. 8, l9). Large colonies are easily dislodged by
waves and can then be found in the pelagial or rolling about gently in the bottom water, usually in the upper litto-
ral; such colonies often have a breakthrough at their previous attachment site. Furthermore, there is often a size-
able gas bubble within the mass which is probably responsible for the floating ability of a colony dislodged from
its original substrate (WINKLER & CORLISS 1965). High abundances cause a green colour of the water and
slimy pollution of the littoral (NAUMANN 1925, own observations).
The locus classicus is Droback, Norway, where MÜLLER (1786) discovered O. versatile in a swamp during
August. EHRENBERG (1838) found it in a lake (Plötzensee) near Berlin, Germany, only during August, but
later also in a pond in the zoological garden of Berlin throughout the year, even under ice. Further records sub-
stantiated by illustrations: bog near the town of Salzburg, dystrophic alpine pond, and oligotrophic lake (Lunzer
See) in Lower Austria (FOISSNER 1980b, FOISSNER & ADAM 1979, FOISSNER et al. 1984); stagnant wa-
ters in Germany (FRANKENBERG 1937, SCHLENKER 1912, STEIN 1854); small, mesosaprobic forest lakes
in Germany with up to 880, 0.4 to 4.5 cm-sized colonies per square metre in April (BÜCKER & HAUSMANN
1994); attached to stems of Potamogeton natans in eutrophic clay-pits (pH 7.5-8) near London, England (HOL-
LOWDAY 1975; Fig. 19-26,28,29); in lakes near London, England (DODGE 1982); stagnant waters in Swit-
zerland, abundant especially during winter (PENARD 1922, PIOUX 1901); Gull Lake (pH 8.5), Lawrence Lake
544

Peritrichia
(pH 8.4), Otis Lake (pH 7.5), Long Lake, and Purdy Bog (pH 5.8) in Michigan, USA, during summer (WIN-
KLER & CORLISS 1965); pond in Indiana, USA (WILLEY & WALKOSZ 1915); in Califomia, USA, during
late winter and in a Canadian spring (GOFF & STEIN l98l).
Records mostly not substantiated by illustrations: on Schizothrix covered stones, on stems of Phragmites and Po-
tamogeton, on Chara and other substrates in oligotrophic lakes (e.g. Hintersee, Lunzer Seen, Wörthersee) of
Austria (BECK 1942, BENDL 1917, BREHM 1907, BREHM & RUTTNER 1926, FINDENEGG 1933, HAEM-
PEL 1918, KUSEL-FETZMANN 1972, MICOLETZKY 1913); benthic in Carinthian lakes, Austria (FINDE-
NEGG 1953); groundwater pond near Vienna, Austria, in May (SPANDL 1926); mountain lakes in Bulgaria
(VALKANOV 1938); shallow water of Lake Langs6 during June and in other Danish freshwaters (SAND-
JENSEN et al. 1994, WESENBERG-LUND 1952); very abundant and attached to stems of Myriophyllum and
Anacharis in an English canal during summer (HARKER 1885); rain puddles on an island near Helsinki, Fin-
land (LEVANDER 1900); lake in France (BEAUCHAMP l9l8); abundant on Phragmites in a mesotrophic lake
(Heiliges Meer) of Germany throughout the year, with a maximum during late June and early July (MÜCKE
1979; WILBERT 1911,Fig.2,8-12,14, 15, 11,18); eutrophic lake (Plußsee) in Germany during spring and
summer,atadepthofupto25minMay,andamaximumof34lind.l'at4minJuly(RECK1987);littoraland
aufwuchs of lakes (e.g., Stechlinsee, Lake Constance, Laacher See) in Germany 1e.g., FLÖSSNER et al. 1985,
KUTTNER 1923, MEUCHE 1939, PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991); eutrophic Lough Ree, Saint Islands, Ire-
land, with a late summer maximum (EATON & CARR 1980); on plants and exposed slides in Bavarian freshwa-
ter during September (BIEGEL 1954, MATTHES 1950); dominant in the periphyton of Latvian lakes (LIEPA
1981); stagnant freshwaters (e.g. Naardermeer) in The Netherlands (GRAAF 1956, GROOT & GRAAF 1960,
REDEKE 1948); large (Lake Geneva) and small lakes and ponds in Switzerland (e.g., ANDRE 1914, 1916,
BOURQUTN-LTNDT 1919, CANN 1907, FOREL 1904, THTEBAUD & FAVRE 1906, THOMAS 1964); under
ice in a Swiss lake (Thunersee) during December (PERTY 1852); lakes on Valamo Island, USSR? (KARPOV et
al. l99l); common in two Michigan lakes (KOFOID 1896); ditches and backwater of a rice paddy in South
Carolina, USA, during January (BAILEY 1851); rare in a pond at the Pennsylvania University campus in April,
USA (WANG 1928); stagnant water bodies along stream margins in the USA (LACKEY 1938a); rare in a lake
near Montreal, Canada (PUYTORAC et al. 1912); benthic in the upper littoral region of saline lakes in Canada
(WILBERT 1986b, 1995); freshwater in Buenos Aires, Argentina (SECKT 1924); Lake Villarrica, northern
Patagonia, in 0-4 m during November and December (THOMASSON 1963).
Records from dystrophic habitats and other stagnant waters: in dystrophic waters of Austria, Germany and Swit-
zerland (FOISSNER etal.1982, MESSIKOMMER 1954, SCHLENKER 1912, ZACHARIAS 1903); once abun-
dant in Mud Lake fen, Michigan, USA (HENEBRY & CAIRNS 1984); brackish water (5.2Voo salinity) in Fin-
Iand (LEVANDER l90l).
Records from running waters (possibly sometimes confused with Ophrydium hyalinum): brook in Tyrol, Austria
(DALLA TORRE 1891); with low abundances in polluted mountain brooks of Germany (BAUER 1987); low-
land brook in Germany (HEUSS 1916); in the aufwuchs of the cooling system of a conventional power station
supplied with water from a beta- to alphamesosaprobic river in Germany (BERNERTH 1982); abundant in the
potamoplankton of the Rhone River throughout the year (ANDRB, ßZO; rare to common in an ox-bow of the
Danube River near Vienna during October and January, and in other branches of this river (ERTL et al. 1961,
KALTENBACH 1960, MATIS & TIRJAKOVÄ |SS+U); Volga River basin (MAMAEVA 1979).
The few older references (e.g., CIENKOWSKY 1881, KENT 1882, LEVANDER 1894, 1894a) to marine popu-
lations may be considered unfounded until rediscovery and careful redescription of the ciliates involved (WIN-
KLER & CORLTSS 1965).
Autecological data: Feeds mainly on bacteria, but also on small algae, fungi, protozoa, and organic debris
I
(GOFF & STEIN 1981, NOLAND 1925, SCHNEIDER 1972). Clearance rate about 5.8 pl ind.-'d (SAND-
JENSEN et al. 1994). MÜCKE 11979) observed the development of colonies on exposed slides: 4 specimens af-
ter 5 d, 4O after 10 d, 400 after 15 d, 500 after 30 d, 5000 after 60 d, corresponding to a generation time of
1.64.9 d. SAND-JENSEN et al. (1994) calculated a mean growth rate of 0.067 t 0.012 d ' (!95 Vo CL, n = 16)
545

Peritrichia
for colonies attached to stones in mid May, corresponding a generation time of about 10 d. BÜCKER &
HAUSMANN (1994) estimated a generation time of 5 d under favourable conditions.
Biomass of 106 specimens (400 pm long) 280 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1992c) to 350 mg (SAND-JENSEN et al.
1994). However, it is very likely more accurate to weigh the colonies, which have a specific density (fresh mass)
close to 1 g cm-3 because the water-filled jelly occupies most of the volume (>97 %o for colonies larger than 1 cm3).
Dry mass of colonies is about I 7o of fresh mass, and it decreases with increasing colony size, mainly because of
the decreased proportion of ciliates. Carbon content of ciliates abott 293 mg g ' dry mass, of jelly 282 mg g-' dry
mass; ratio carbon to nitrogen of ciliates about 6.8, of jelly about 15.7; one zooid contains about 0.41 ng chloro-
phyll (SAND-JENSEN et al. 1994). Ash content of colonies is about 0.07 7o (VINOGRADOV 1953). Net oxygen
production in the jelly is 0.8 + 0.6 pg cm-3 h' (+ SD, n= 4), and darkness respiration is 1.4 + 0.3 pg cm-3 h'. Light
compensation point is close to 20 pmol photons m 2 s-l and light saturation point at about 200 pmol m'z s'r (SAND-
JENSEN et al. 1994, 1997; see this paper for more details on ecology). Upper temperature limit probably slightly
above 20" C (BÜCKER & HAUSMANN 1994). Autecological data -+ Table.
Ophrydium versatile rs positively phototactic (WINKLER & CORLISS 1965). The symbiotic green algae belong
to the Chlorella vulgaris group (BENDL l9ll ,, GEITLER 1941); their number varies from 500 to 2500 per zooid
(EATON & CARR 1980, WINKLER & CORLISS 1965). During encystment a part of the symbionts is digested
(GEITLER t93t).
Table: Autecological data of Ophrydium versatile. Column 1, from NOLAND (1925; 2 analyses from freshwater habitats in the USA); col-
umns 2 and 3, from FOISSNER et al. (1982; column 2: 7 analyses from dystrophic alpine water bodies in Austria; column 3: mass occur-
rence in a dystrophic pond); columns 4 and 5, from RECK (1987; small, eutrophic forest lake in Germany; column 4: total range; column 5:
>500 ind. l-r; n = ?).
Parameters References
/)
1 2 J 4 5
Saprobity o-b o-b
Temperature (' C) 8.1-10.5 9.0-16.5 t6.5 4.2-18.9 4.2-t6.9
pH 8.0-8.4 4.9-5.2 5.1 1 .2-9.3 7.2-8.9
o, (mg l') 6.8-9.7 s.9-8.6 86 0.2-t6.9 t.t-1 .6
Oz (saturation 7o) 86-tt7 73-r2l T2I 2-180 8-t1
KMnO+ coltsumption (mg I') 36-545 36
l')
NH+*-N (mg 0.07-0.1 0.2 0.03-0. 15 0.08-0. 12
Bacteria ml ' (x 10u; direct counts) 0.03-2.5 2.5
The jelly of the colonies is inhabited by various organisms (e.g., filamentous cyanobacteria, Nostoc, Calothrix
fusca, stlfur-bacteria llke Beggiatoa, diatoms, Scenedesmus; BENDL 1917, EATON & CARR 1980, EICH-
WALD 1849, GEITLER 1975). Nitzschia flexoides is very likely a specific inhabitant of the colonies of Ophry-
dium versatile, whereas Cymbella cesatii is the most abundant diatom (GEITLER 1968). MÜCKE (1979) found
a ciliate, Espejoa culex (a characteristic host of spawn-jelly), in some colonies, and -+ Paradileptus elephantinus
feeds on the green zooids. BREHM (1907) mentioned an abundant occulrence of a parasitic rotifer (Proales
parasita) in the colonies.
Ecologicat summary: Reliably recorded from Eurasia only. Cbmmon in lakes, ponds, and bogs. Usually at-
tached to various substrates, however, sometimes dislodged and then planktonic or benthic. Throughout the year,
but temperatures below 20o C preferred. Resting cysts known. Feeds mainly on bacteria. The symbiotic algae in-
dicate that O. versatile can sustain periods oflow food supply. This is also reflected by the oligosaprobic classifi-
cation according to FOISSNER et al. (1992c): o = 8, b =2,I= 4,SI= 1.2.
546

Peritrichia
/
'/*/
.:.':rl.:4::ält:t::lj!:::t:ii?:/4tin,,4.':.'':, ".. _ _ _ *:(n:4.irt.i/-i-.iw.4;1i/,4tjiz..ü2N.-rr,!:,!rr*riji.i!t'+- :1!,jiji!,-y....i.. r...._..:__j)///:_ /t-4..:.!.;.t.!.:.:.a,i:!:!:t_:i::l:.:
& s
Ophrydium versatile in vivo (8-12, fiom WILBERT 1971 and unpublished photographs ofsame population. 8, 9, dissecting microscope
photographs; 10-12, interference contrast micrographs). 8: Colonies (arrows) of various size attached to Myriophyllum.9: Old, dislodged,
flabby, decaying colonies. 10, 11: Extended and contracted (c) specimens. Note that zooids are green like a Paramecium bursaria due to
symbiotic algae 2.5-5 pm across. 12: Posterior portion of zooid attached to thin, acontractile but flexible stalk. c = contracted zooid, ST =
stalk.
548

Peritrichia
"-:.:, -.,4
&YS
r8
Ophrydium versatile (13, fiom FOISSNER etal. 1992c;14, 15, 17,18, unpublished micrographs fiom Dr. N. WILBERT
(Bonn, Germany) and from WILBERT 1977;16, from FOISSNER 1979b. 13,14, in vivo bright field and interference con-
trast micrographs; 15, 17, 18, protargol impregnation; 16, in vivo phase contrast micrograph). 13: Surface view showing the
honeycombed, colourless chambers comprising the gelatinous colonies. The borders ofthe chambers (arrow) become recog-
nizable due to adhering organic debris. 14: Slightly to distinctly contracted zooids with conspicuous longitudinal folds in the
symbiont-free posterior body ponion. 15: Contracted specimen showing myoneme in peristomial collar and macronucleus.
16: Posterior portion showing the very thin, acontractile stalk. Note the very fine transverse striation of the pellicle recogniz-
able at the cell margin. 17, 18: Oral ciliature. The nuclei of the numerous symbiotic green algae appear as dark dots. AW =
anlage of aboral ciliary wreath, MA = macronucleus, MY = myonemes (contractile fibres), SA = symbiotic green algae, ST
= stalk, UM = undulating membrane (haplokinety), 1, l, = peniculi I and2.
549

Peritrichia
20
A<-
Y}
ffi,
AW_
24
26
i , ft.',ß
u,
li -+* "I ?: :'r!
t"t
t.f t$,it,'fji
c
27
29
Ophrydiumversatile invivo (19-26,28,29,fromHOLLOWDAY 1975;27,trom GEITLER 1937). 19: Threemiddle-sized
to large colonies attached to stems and leaves of Potamogeton natans.20,26: Fully contracted and completely extended
specimens, S0 pm,350 pm. 21,22: Feeding zooids, about l60 pm. Organelles (nuclear apparatus, contractile vacuole) are
usually masked by the numerous symbiotic green algae and can thus be seen only in heavily squeezed cells. 23: Small col-
ony (about 1.5 mm across) underneath the water surface. Arrows mark swarmers.24: Swimming swarmer, 87 pm.25: Re-
cently attached swarmer, 150 pm. 27: Resting cyst, to the right ejected remnants of digested symbionts. 28r292 Early and
very late division stage, ? pm, 175 pm. AW = aboral ciliary wreath.
550

Peritrichia
Ophrydium naumanni psrl,st, ts62
1925 planktische Modifikation von Ophrydium versatile EHRENB. - NAUMANN, Arch. Hydrobiol., 15: 494
(without illustration, -) taxonomy).
1962 Ophrydium naumenni PEJLER, Zool.Bidr. Upps., 33:450.
1988 Ophrydium naumanni PEJLER, 1962 - MODENUTTI, Neotropica, 36: 100 (record substantiated by
bright field micrographs, identification, however, doubtful, -+ taxonomy).
Taxonomy
NAUMANN (1925) described a planktonic modification of -+ Ophrydium versatile having colonies comprising
only few specimens and a gelatinous matrix usually distinctly below 200 pm. Later, PEJLER (1962), also work-
ing on Swedish lakes, studied this modification in more detail and considered the characters (extended specimens
40-50prm long, colonies very small with usually 1-5 specimens) sufficient to establish a new species,viz. O.
naumanni (Fig. l). However, it is uncertain whether NAUMANN and PEJLER studied the same species because
PEJLER did not mention a gelatinous matrix; furthermore, it cannot be excluded that NAUMANN observed col-
of
ony founders --> O. versatile, a species which occurred concomitantly. We are rather certain that PEJLER's
O . naumanni is a distinct species and not a juvenile stage of another, large Ophrydium because peritrichs divide
longitudinally, that is, the daughter cells have the same length as the parents. Furthermore, it can be excluded that
O. naumanni is a starved form of -+ O. yersatile because a size reduction of the extended specimens by a factor
of ten or more is unlikely.
BICK (1972a, p. 41) provided a rather detailed figure of O. naumanni; unfortunately, he did not indicate whether
it is based on original observations or on details from the better studied -) O. versatile. Likewise, the data by
MODENUTTI (1988) are ambiguous because she did not clearly indicate whether or not the measurements are
based on fully extended specimens; the size given (l 12 x 30 ]rm, n = 30) matches that of contracted zooids of -+
O. versatile surprisingly well. The following differential diagnosis is thus based exclusively on the brief original
description.
Dilferenl ial diagnosis
1) Extended zooids in vivo about 40-50 x 10 pm, length approximately five times width (Fig. l).
2) Extended zooids slenderly vase-shaped (Fig. 1).
3) Nuclear apparatus not known, very likely as in other Ophrydium species, that is, filiform.
4) Contractile vacuole not known.
s) Cells green because packed with symbiotic algae (Fig. 1). Pellicle likely with very fine transverse striation.
6) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end ofcell, details not known (Fig. 1).
7) Stalk dichotomously branching, acontractile (myoneme lacking), smooth, very thin (Fig. 1).
8) Colonies with up to 20 zooids, usually, however, only with one or two, rarely 3-5 specimens. Gelatinous ma-
trix (elly) not mentioned.
Similar species
Easy to separate from other green Ophrydium species (reviewed by WINKLER & CORLISS 1965) by the very
small size of the zooids and the very low number of specimens per colony. The extended zooids of -s Ophry-
diumversatile and -> O. eutrophicum,whose dislodged colonies are often found in the pelagial, are distinctly
551

Peritrichia
larger (250-600 pm long) and the colonies are usually several centimetres across. 1, 5 (symbiotic algae present),
8 (small colonies or solitary; euplanktonic) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic. PEJLER ( 1962,, 1964) discov-
ered O. naumanni in the large and deep Lake Vättern, Sweden, during July.
Furthermore, he found it in Lake Unden, northern Västergötland; Lake Östra
Laxsjön, southwestern Närke; and in the sub-arctic Lake Vassijaure, northern
Swedish Lapland. All lakes belonged to the oligotrophic-oligohumic type
with a transparency exceeding 4 m. NAUMANN (1925 + taxonomy) found
his population in lakes near Anebodas, southern Sweden. MODENUTTI
(+
(1988) collected her doubtful material taxonomy) in the plankton of the
oligotrophic West Lake Moreno, Province of Rio Negro, Argentina.
I
Recently, WÖLFL (1996) counted 1267 ind. I in 0-25 m of the warm-
temperate, oligotrophic Lake Pirehueico, Chile, and MODENUTTI (1991)
found it in oligotrophic lakes of the North Andean Patagonian region (see
+
Ecogram 4 by Stentor araucanus).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Probably feeds on bacteria.
Biomass of 106 specimens about 5 rng (our calculations). Autecological data
see Table by + Stentor araucanus. Reliably recorded only from Sweden.
Ophrydium naumanni (frorn PEJLER
Possibly adapted to oligotrophic conditions by small body size and symbiotic 1962). 1: Colony with twoi extended
algae. specimens, length of zooids 42 pm.
552

4.4.4 Spirotrichea sürscHI-r, 188e
The spirotrichs (= pslrSrmenophora JANKOWSKI) comprise the oligotrichs, the heterotrichs, and the hypo-
trichs. The somatic ciliature consists of rows of cirri (groups of basal bodies) and/or dikinetids (basal body pairs)
having either both basal bodies or only the anterior one ciliated. The postciliary microtubules are directed poste-
riorly and superimpose with their equivalents arising from more anteriorly located basal bodies of the same row.
These microtubular bundles (= postciliodesmata) are the most important character of the Spirotrichea and its
sister-group, the Karyorelictea. The oral apparatus is usually very prominent and possesses serially arranged
membranelles (adoral zone of membranelles) running counter-clockwise to the cytostome. One or two undulating
membranes border the right margin of the buccal cavity.
The Oligotrichida BÜTSCHLI, 1887 (e.g. -+ Halteria, -+ Limnostrombidium, -+ Rimostromhidium, -s
Tintinnidium, -+ Codonella) are characterized by four features (FOISSNER et al. 1991 , p. 131): (i) The somatic
ciliature is + strongly reduced and the cilia are often modified to short or long bristles; (ii) The oral apparatus
consists of an almost circular zone of adoral membranelles and an often rather inconspicuous undulating mem-
brane. It occupies the anterior end of the cell and the conspicuous adoral membranelles are used both for collect-
ing food items and locomotion; (iii) The macronucleus has a replication band (like in hypotrichs, see below),
where DNA and histones are replicated; (iv) Stomatogenesis is apokinetal, that is, no parental basal bodies are
involved in the formation of the daughter oral apparatus. The oligotrichs are the most characteristic component of
the limnetic and marine plankton ciliate community, the so-called Oligotrichetea (FOISSNER et al. 1991,1995).
Only few species are semi-sessile (e.g. Strobilidium caudatum) or adhere the lorica to a substrate (Tintinnidium
semiciliatum). The oligotrichs often represent a large proportion of marine and freshwater micro-zooplankton
(e.g. ARNDT 1994,LAYBOURN-PARRY 1992). They feed on bacteria, autotrophic and heterotrophic flagel-
lates, and various algae, thus being an important component of the microbial loop. Resting cyst formation very
likely more common than indicated by literature data.
The Heterotrichida STEIN, 1859 (e.g. ) Stentor, ) Linostomella, Spirostomum, Metopus) are characterized
by four features (FOISSNER et al. 1992c, p. 313): (i) The somatic ciliature is usually rather dense and consists of
many longitudinal rows of basal body pairs (dikinetids); (ii) The oral apparatus is composed of a large, conspicu-
ous adoral zone of membranelles and a single undulating membrane; (iii) The postciliodesmata are usually well
developed; (iv) Stomatogenesis is parakinetal, that is, several parental somatic ciliary rows are involved in the
formation of the daughter oral apparatus. Most species live benthic in limnetic and marine habitats, some are ses-
slle (Stentor), and only three are + euplanktonic, viz. -) Stentor amethystinus, -+ S. araucanus, and -s Lino-
stomella yorticella. Several genera (e.9. Bothrostoma, Brachonella, Caenomorpha, Metopus) are strictly anaero-
bic and inhabit the sapropel or anaerobic strata of the pelagial, especially in the hypolimnion. Few species are
soil-inhabiting and several live in the digestive tract of oligochaetes, insects, molluscs, amphibians, and reptiles.
The heterotrichs use a wide range of food, viz. bacteria, algae, flagellates, naked and testate amoebae, ciliates,
rotifers, and oligochaetes. Resting cyst formation is common.
The Hypotrichia STEIN, 1859 (e.g. Stylonychia, Oxytricha, -+ Pseudostrombidium, -+ Hypotichidium, -+
Spiretella) are characterized by the following features (FOISSNER et al. 1991, p. 191): (i) The body is dorso-
ventrally flattened, except for most planktonic species; (ii) The ciliature of the ventral side consists of many cirri
(polykinetids), that of the dorsal side mainly or exclusively of basal body pairs (dikinetids); (iii) The oral appara-
tus usually occupies the left anterior quadrant of the cell and consists of an often question-mark shaped adoral
zone of membranelles and two undulating membranes (paroral and endoral); (iv) The macronucleus has a repli-
cation band (like in oligotrichs, see above), where DNA and histones are replicated; (v) Stomatogenesis is
parakinetal or apokinetal, that is, the daughter oral apparatus originates with or without participation of parental
ciliature. The cirri originate from few (e.g. Oxytricha) or many (e.g. Urostyla) longitudinal or oblique anlagen.
Hypotrichs are widely distributed in limnetic, marine, and terrestrial biotopes. Most freshwater species are ben-
thic, that is, live in the aufwuchs and detritus, and only few species are euplanktonic (+ Pseudostrombidium
planctonticum, ) Hypotrichidium conicum, -+ Pelagotrichidium faurei, -+ Spiretella plancticola). Small hypo-
trichs are usually bacterial feeders, the larger species are often omnivorous. Resting cyst formation is common.
553

Oligotrichida
Halteria bifurcata TAMAR, 1e68
1968 Halteria bifurcata TAMAR, Acta Protozool.,6: 176.
1974 Halteria bifurcata TAMAR, 1968 TAMAR, Acta Protozool 13: l7l (detailed comparison with H.
grandinella).
l9l4 Halteria bifurcata var. brevis TAMAR, Acta Protozool., 13: l8l
.
IggO Halteria bifurcata TAMAR, 1968 - TAMAR, Arch. Protistenk 138: 3 (comparison with H. grandinel-
la).
1990 Halteria bifurcata brevis (TAMAR, l9l4) subsp. nov. - TAMAR, Arch. Protistenk. , 138: 8.
1995 Halteria bifurcota TAMAR, 1968 - KRAINER, Lauterbornia,,2l: 52 (detailed redescription from life and
after silver impregnation).
Taxonomy
FOISSNER et al. (1991) considered H. bifurcata as junior synonym of -+ H. grandinella. However, KRAINER
(1995) confirmed TAMAR's species by silver impregnation (-+ character 6). In addition, H. bifurcala is green-
coloured, very likely due to symbiotic algae (KRAINER 1995, TAMAR 1968, 1974). Certainly, differences
between H. bifurcata and -+ H. grandinellalchlorelligera are small and sophisticated, and thus should be con-
firmed in further populations.
TAMAR (1974, 1990) described aberrant forms and the subspecies brevis (see next paragraph). The "Nine Mile
Pond strain" differed from the typical form in the structure of bristles l, 2 and 4 (Fig. 4, lFl2). The curve
toward the anterior at the distal third of bristle I varied among different individuals from apparently absent and
almost absent to quite shallow. The branches of the distal bifurcation of bristle 2 had significantly greater com-
bined lengths in this aberrant form than in the normal H. bifurcata. Also, unlike in the normal H. bifurcata, in
this form the posterior branch of bristle 2 was the shorter one and it was noticeably more curved than the anterior
branch. The bristle 4 were somewhat over normal length; however, they lacked the normal bifurcation; one
specimen was unusual in having an anterior bulge around its cell body (Fig. 12).
The subspecies brevis differs from the normal form by the anterior body widening and details of the bristles (Fig.
5, 13). As in the Nine Mile Pond population, the posterior branch of bristle 2 is the shorter one. In addition, bris-
tle 1 is typically not curved but straight and directed sharply forward. Bristle 4 is usually much shorter than the
others and divided into two parts (or is double) throughout its length (TAMAR 1974, KRAINER 1995). How-
ever, in another population TAMAR ( 1990) found bristle 4 to be no more robust than the other bristles and stated
that bristle 4, like bristles I and 3, are neither bifurcated nor divided into 2 major components (Fig. 5).
Diflerent ial diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 20-30 pm across.
2) Body globular to clumsily fusiform or ellipsoidal. Peristomial bottom sometimes slightly depressed causing
inconspicuous collar bearing the adoral membranelles (Fig. 2, 6, 10--16).
3) Macronucleus in mid-body, ellipsoidal or dumb-bell shaped, in vivo 6.5*9.5 x 9_12.5 pm. One spherical
micronucleus (Fig. 2, 6-8, 20, 2l).
4) Contractile vacuole left of buccal cavity slightly above mid-body (Fi9.2,6).
s) Cytoplasm usually green due to symbiotic (?) algae (do not appear to be inside of food vacuoles). Algae with-
out stigma, according to TAMAR (1968) 2.54pm across, according to TAMAR (1974) only 0.9 x 1.2 pm to
1.8 x2.1 pm (Fig. 6).
6) In equatorial areaT (very rarely 6) rather regularly spaced, slightly oblique ciliary rows (umping bristle com-
plexes) connected by fibrils (Fig. 2-16). Each row consists of 7 basal bodies forming five groups with 1,2, l,
554

Oligotrichida
l,2basal bodies (from anterior;Fig.7-9) having 24-27 long cilia (bristles). Rather invariably four jump-
Stm
ing bristles per row, bristles 2 and 4 usually bifurcated distally, bristle I curved forward in its distal third,
bristle 3 straight (Fig.2,3,6,14). Characters ofaberrantform and subspecies brevis, see taxonomy.
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of prominent adoral zone of membranelles and very
inconspicuous undulating membrane at right margin of buccal cavity (Fig. 2,6,1,14).22-23 adoral mem-
branelles grouped in l5-16 outer (collar) membranelles encircling anterior body end and 7 (rarely 8) inner
(buccal) membranelles extending into short buccal cavity. Cilia of outer membranelles 17-21 pm long.
8) Movement highly characteristic, that is, jumping. The wide jumps are followed by + long periods of forward
swimming in a right-wound spiral; frequently it also rests, that is, is almost motionless or rotates on the spot.
Further details, see autecological data and TAMAR (1919).
Similar species
In vivo almost inseparable from green-coloured (due to ingested algae) specimens of -> H. grandinella (no sym-
biotic algae; 7-10 ciliary rows, usually 9-10; moves forward along left-wound spiral). After silver impregnation,
however, clearly distinguishable by the different arrangement and number of basal bodies in the ciliary rows (cp.
Fig.7-9 with Fig. 5,22 of -+ H. grandinella). Halteria chlorelligera KAHL, 1935 is somewhat larger
(40-50 pm), probably confined to microaerobic benthic habitats (FOISSNER et al. 1991, p. 134), and its symbi-
otic algae have a red stigma. Species of -s Pelagohalteria have L-shaped ciliary rows and the symbiotic algae of
the green -> P. viridis have a red stigma. Inexperienced workers may confuse H. bifurcata with Meseres (simple
meridional rows of long cilia in middle third of cell), -+ Limnostromhidium and --> Pelagostrombidium (without
jumping bristles; with conspicuous, needle-shaped extrusomes), -+ Rimostrombidium (without jumping bristles,
adoral zone of membranelles forms a ring), and gymnostomatids such as -+ Askenasia spp. (no adoral mem-
branelles but 3 ciliary belts consisting of many [about 50-60] ciliary rows) and -s Mesodinium spp.(usually
smaller, no adoral membranelles). 5, 6, 7 (prominent adoral zone) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in lentic waters of North America. TAMAR (1968) discovered Halteria
bifurcata in the lake system of Deming Park, Indiana, USA. This site was characterized by a bed of Cabomba,
over which a mat of algae and duckweed floated. In the jars pH ranged from 8.0-8.5, temperature from
20-25" C. Addition of some skimmed milk powder produced high abundances. In unmodified lake water
cultures, H. bifurcata gathered around snail egg masses and also around pieces of plant stalks.
Later, TAMAR (1974, 1982, 1990) recorded H. bifurcata from various sites of North America,e.g., from the
bayou (4.5 mg 1-r Oz) of a mill dam in Otter creek (Indiana; locus classicus of the variety "brevis"), from lakes
and ponds in Ohio, Rhode Island, Connecticut and Colorado as well as and from an artificial lake and a water lily
basin in California. The Colorado site, a watering pond for cows in the San Juan Mountains, was at an elevation
of 2 100 m. TAMAR ( I 990) found H. bifurcata also along a north-south curve extending from within the state of
Michigan through Indiana and Kentucky to the Everglades of Florida. One site that provided only H. biJircata
(and not H. grandinella) had l0 mg l-r Oz, a pH of 7.8, received sewage, had a black bottom, a high sulphur con-
tent and was malodorous; an operational oil rig was nearby and there was little aquatic life (TAMAR 1990).
KRAINER ( 1995) found 11. bifurcata in the pelagial of groundwater ponds in Styria, Austria.
Autecological data: Feeds mainly on bacteria, especially cocci and vibrios (TAMAR 1974). However, some-
times green algae and diatoms (17 x 5 pm) are ingested (TAMAR 1968). Biomass of 106 specimens about 8 mg.
The Florida populations (see above) were sampled at about 30-32' C (TAMAR 1990). An outstanding character-
istic of H. bifircata is the tendency to remain quiescent for periods of time (TAMAR 1914). lt is then almost
immobile, although the adoral zone remains active, or turns slowly. Such often extended periods of relative
immobility may be suddenly broken by a short jump, a long jump or dart which covers a considerable distance,
or a long period of reversal (backward spiralling). Reversal is initiated especially after a specimen contacts the
substrate.
555

Oligotrichida
Ecological summary: Ecology and distribution insufficiently known, presumably as in -) H. grandinella. Possi-
bly more common than indicated by literature data because very likely often confused with -+ H. grandinella
and -+ Pelagohalteria spp. The presence of symbiotic algae indicates that H. bifurcata can sustain periods of low
food supply.
IM
/o"
AM
1
'2
Halteria grandinella (1, fiom TAMAR 1990), ventral view in vivo (30 pm) shown tbr comparison with H . hiJurcata (Fig.2, 3, 6).
Halteria bifurcata (2, from TAMAR 1982; 3-5, from TAMAR 1990; 6-9, from KRAINER 1995. 2-6, in vivo; 7-9, protargol
impregnation). 2, 3, 6: Dorsal and ventral views of typical (normal) specimens, body diameter 2O-24 p,m. 4: Aberrant H. biJürcata (24 pm)
from the Nine Mile Pond in the Everglades of Florida. Aberration concerns bristles (see Fig. 10-12 and text). 5: Halteria hiJurcato brevis,
2l pm, has very short (about l4 pm) bristles 4.7,8: Clliary pattern of ventral and dorsal side, 2l pm. Arrow marks a ciliary row. 9: Poste-
rior polar view. Arrow marks a fibre connecting posterior basal bodies of ciliary rows. AM = outer (collar) membranelles of adoral zone, CV
= contractile vacuole, IM = inner (buccal) membranelles of adoral zone, JB = jumping bristles, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, SA
= symbiotic algae, UM = undulating membrane, l-4 = jumping bristles (bristles 2 and 4 usually bifurcated).
556

Oligotrichida
Halleria bifurcata (10-15, phase-contrast micrographs fiom TAMAR 1990). 10-12: An aberrant population fiom the Nine'Mite Pond, a
shallow water in a freshwater marl prairie containing mangroves. Aberration concems bristles (see Fig. 4 and text). The specimen in (12) is
widened anteriorly, which is usual in the subspecies brevis. 13: A Halteria bifurcata ärevls specimen with long bristles 4 (see Fig. 5 for a
typical brevis specimen). 14, 15: Typical (normal) H. bifurcata. Figure 14 shows a specimen from Rhode Island. All bristle types are dis-
cemible. Bristle 1 is not furcated. Figure 15 shows a specimen from Colorado. Bristle I on the left is furcated. AM = outer (collar) mem-
branelles of adoral zone, e = anterior body widening, 1-4 = bristles (bristles 2 and 4 usually bifurcated). Scale bars 10 pm.
557

Oligotrichida
Halteriabifurcata(16-2l,phase-contrastmicrographsfiomTAMAR 1974). 16: Lateral view. 17,19:.Lateral andpolarviewof conjugating
specimens. A single bulge has formed beyond their adoral membranelles (17, arrow). 18: Frontal view showing the radially arranged outer
adoral membranelles and 7 jumping bristle complexes.20r 2Lz Early and late anaphase micronucleus. AM = outer (collar) membranelles of
adoral zone, J§ = jumping bristles complexes (ciliary rows), 1-4 = jumping bristles (bristles 2 and 4 usually bifurcated).
558

Oligotrichida
H alte ria grandine lla GvfirrvR, ti i 3) DUJARDTN, 1 84 1
1773 Trichoda grandinella UÜLLER, Vermium Terrestrium et Fluviatilium,p.TT (without illustration).
l84l Halteria grandinelld (MÜLLER,1116) - DUJARDIN, Zoophytes, p. 414 (combining author).
1932 Halteria grandinella (O. F. MÜLLER, 1786) - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl.,25:504 (revision).
1986 Halteria grandinella (o. F. MÜLLER, 1786) - DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS, Faune rropicale,
26:417 (revision).
1986 Halteria grandinella (MÜLLER, 1173) - MAEDA, Bull. Ocean Res. Inst., Univ. Tokyo,2l: 14 (revision).
1989 Halteria grandinella (MÜLLER, 1773) - SONG & WILBERT, Lauterbomia, 3: 149 (authoritative rede-
scription from life and after silver impregnation).
l99l Haheria grandinella (MUELLER, 1773) DUJARDIN, 1841 - FOISSNER, BLATTERER, BERGER &
KOHMANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll9l: 131 ("Ciliate-
Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
1992 Halteria grandinell0 (MÜLLER, 1773) DUJARDIN, I84l - PETZ & FOISSNER, J. Protozool. , 39: 165
(morphogenesis).
1993 Halteria grandinella (MÜLLER, 1773) - SONG, Chin. J. Oceanol. Limnol., ll: 122 (morphology and
morphogenesis of a Chinese population).
1997 Halteria grandinell4 (MÜLLER, 1773) DUJARDIN, 1841 - BERGER, FOISSNER & KOHMANN,
Bestimmung und Ökologie der Mikrosaprobien, p. 169 (guide to micro-organisms of the saprobic system).
Taxonomy
Halteria sensu lato comprises abott 12 species ((DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNBIS tgAO, MAEDA
1986). However, only few of them have been described in sufficient detail, viz., H. grandinella, -+ H. bifurcata,
-+ Pelagohalteria viridis, and -+ P . cirrifura. Slight differences in the number of ciliary @ristle) rows, jumping
bristles within a row, and adoral membranelles might be related to inexact observations. Consequently, we con-
sider most species as varieties of Halteria grandinella as long as their variability and status have not been proved
by morphometric characteization of silver impregnated specimens. FOISSNER et al. (1991) considered -» 11.
bifurcata TAMAR as junior synonym of H. grandinella. However, KRAINER (1995) redescribed TAMAR's
species by silver impregnation. In addition, it very likely has symbiotic algae.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 2040 pm, usually about 30 pm across.
2) Body globular to clumsily fusiform or ellipsoidal (Fig.3, 6,'l .9, 10, 15). Peristomial bottom sometimes
slightly depressed, causing inconspicuous collar bearing the adoral membranelles (Fig. 3, 14).
3) Macronucleus in mid-body, globular to oblong, sometimes rather irregular possible due to preparation. One
spherical micronucleus (Fig. 3, 8,12,17).
4) Contractile vacuole left of buccal cavity slightly above mid-body (Fig. 3, 8, 12).
5) Cytoplasm colourless, without symbiotic algae (Fig. 3, 9; Caution: Halteria grandinella can be green due to
ingested algae! Differentiation of zoochlorellae and food vacuoles with green algae: zoochlorellae are about
5 pm across and located singly in the cytoplasm, that is, are not enclosed in a vacuole as ingested algae).
6) In equatorial arca'l-lO, according to the authoritative redescription 9-10, rather regularly spaced, longitudi-
nal ciliary rows fiumping bristle cornplexes) connected by fibrils (Fig.2,3,7*ll, 13, 18). Each row consists
of 3-6 basal body pairs (appear often as single granules, very likely depending on preparation conditions)
forming 3-4 (usually 4) groups. Anterior two groups with I cilium (bristle) each, posterior two groups with 2
cilia each, forming two posterior jumping bristles (Fig. 5, 22). All together usually four jumping bristles in
each ciliary row; bristles 15-25 pm long, distally sometimes bifurcated (Fig. 3, 7, 9). Occasionally, the
s59

Oligotrichida
anterior two cilia stick together, so that only three bristles can be seen (Fig. 6, 7). Thus, bristle number must
be cautiously used in live identification (-+ taxonomy).
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of prominent adoral zone of membranelles and very
inconspicuous undulating membrane at right margin of buccal cavity (Fig. 24,8,9, 15, 11 ,20). 22-25 ado-
ral membranelles (18-26 when including all supposed synonyms) grouped in 15*16 (13-19) outer (collar)
membranelles encircling anterior body end andl-8 (5-10) inner (buccal) membranelles extending into short
buccal cavity. Cilia of outer membranelles distinctly longer (15-25 pm) than those of inner membranelles
(4-10 pm).
8) Movement highly characteristic, that is, jumping. The wide jumps are followed by + long periods of fast for-
ward swimming in a left-wound spiral; frequently it also rests, that is, is almost motionless or rotates on the
spot. Further details, see autecological data and TAMAR (1919).
Similar species
Live specimens, if green-coloured by ingested (not symbiotic! see character 5) algae, are almost inseparable from
-+ H. bfurcara (usually with symbiotic algae, rather invariably 7 ciliary rows, moves forward along right-wound
spiral). After silver impregnation, however, clearly distinguishable by the different arrangement and number of
basal bodies in the ciliary rows (cp. Fig. 5, 22 withFig.l-9 of H. bifurcata). Halteria chlorelligera KAHL, 1932
is somewhat larger (40-50 pm) and green due to symbiotic algae (revision see FOISSNER et al. 1991, p. l3$.
Species of -+ Pelagohalteria have L-shaped ciliary rows and the most common species, P. viridis, has symbiotic
algae. Inexperienced workers may confuse H. grandinella with Meseres (simple meridional rows of long cilia in
middle third of cell; PETZ & FOISSNER 1992), ) Limnostrombidium and -+ Pelagostombidium (without
jumping bristles; with conspicuous, needle-shaped extrusomes), -+ Rimostrombidium (without jumping bristles,
adoral zone of membranelles forms a ring), and gymnostomatids such as -+ Askenasia spp. (no adoral mem-
branelles but 3 ciliary belts consisting of many [about 50-60] longitudinal ciliary rows) and -+ Mesodinium spp.
(usually smaller, no adoral membranelles). 5, 6, 7 (prominent adoral zone of membranelles) are key characters
for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Very common and often rather abundant in the pelagial, but also frequent in run-
ning and brackish waters. Few, insufficiently documented records from marine environments. Also common in
astatic, small water bodies (tree holes, rain puddles, forest ponds, rice fields) and soils because it forms resting
cysrs (Fig. 19; FOISSNER 1987a, 1998, KRAMER 1964). Occurs throughout the year, with highesr abundances
usually in spring and autumn (KRAMER 1964, GROLIERE 1977, SANDERS et al. 1989).
Very many records from ponds, lakes, and reservoirs: up to 8000 ind. l-r in a shallow, mesotrophic alkaline lake
(Neusiedler See) in Austria (SCHÖNBERGER 1994); eutrophic reservoir in Czech Republic (§Mgf et at.
1996); dominant in the surface zone (l-5 m) of a brown-coloured humic and moderately acidic (pH 5.1-7.5) Iake
in France (AMBLARD et al. 1995) and in a brown-water pond in Austria (21000 ind.l-r; SCHÖNBERGER
1994); 216 000 ind.l' in a eutrophic pond in Bonn, Germany (WILBERT 1969); Lake Constance, Germany
(CLEVEN 1996); 10 000-60 000 ind. lr in the oxycline (1-1.8 m) and hypolimnion of a highly productive pond
in England (FINLAY et al. 1988, GUHL et al. 1994); lakes near Oslo, Norway (STABELL 1996); up to
75 000 ind. 1-' in the surface layer of a polluted lake (Rotsee) in Switzerland at end of May (STEINMANN &
SURBECK 1934); up to 666 ind.l-' in the epilimnion (6m) of an oligotrophic reservoir in Russia (NEBRAT
1975); lakes in Baikal area (LOKOT 1981, -+ Ecogram on p. 310); 80 ind.lr in 0-38 m of a 103 m deep reser-
voir in Russia (ALEKPEROV 1983); reservoirs of the Moscow River supply system (BELOVA 1994); ponds
and saline lakes in Canada (ARCHBOLD & BERGER 1985, TAYLOR 1919a, WILBERT 1995); in North
American lakes (TAMAR 1965); up to 2500 ind. l-' in eutrophic reservoirs of Brazil (BARBIERI & GODINHO
ORLANDI 1989a, b; see Ecogram by -+ Mesodinium pulex); maritime Antarctic lake on Signey Island
(LAYBOURN-PARRY et al. 1996).
560

Oligotrichida
AIso common in, on, and above aerobic sediments (up to 5000 ind. l-') of, for instance, eutrophic ponds, lakes,
and reservoirs in Italy, Germany, and Spain (MADONI l99la, b, REINNARTH 1919, SALVADO & GRACIA
l99l), ferttlized and unfertilized fish ponds (GRABACKA 1971), and the Elbe River (GRIMM 1968, PFANN-
KUCHE et al. 1975). Also recorded from the cooling system of a power station (BERNERTH 1982) and from
ground water (WEGELIN 1966). Records from caves, see GITTLESON & HOOVER (1969).
Common in running waters: oligo- to polysaprobic brooks in the city of Salzburg, Austria (HASLAUER & HAI-
DER 1976); rivers in Bulgaria (e.g. DETCHEVA 1983a--c, -+ Table); Danube River at a streaming velocity of
1.5 m s'l and in ox-bows (BERECZKY 1977, l9'l'la, b, -+ Table; MATIS & TIRJAKOY A 1994b, TIRJAKOVÄ
1992); eutrophic forest brooks near Bonn, Germany (JUTRCZENKI 1982); mesosaprobic rivers (Amper,
Neckar, Enz, Kocher, Danube) in Germany (BUCK 1961, FOISSNER et al.l992a, b); rivers and brooks in the
USA (BOVEE 1960, PATRICK 1961, -+ Table).
Some records from sewage treatment plants: trickling filters (LACKEY 1938a); secondary stabilization pond
with 5G-80 mg l-' BOD5 in India (KRISHNAMOORTHI & SARKAR 1981); at <150 mg l-r BODs and at
>2-12 mg l-r Oz in fish ponds used for sewage treatment (GRABACK A l9l3). However, H. grandinella and oli-
gosaprobic ciliates disappeared in fish ponds near Munich (Germany) when supplied with effluent from
mechanically treated sewage (KAUFMANN 1958).
Autecological data: Feeds mainly on bacteria; some species (Aerobacter aerogenes, Pseudomonas fluorescens,
three Neisseria species) were preferred in feeding experiments (TAYLOR 1979b). Occasionally, flagellates
(CLEVEN 1996, GFiLLERT tgOt, KAHL 1932) and 2-5 pm sized algae (Rhodomonas minuta) are ingested
(BURNS & GILBERT 1993, FINLAY et al. 1988, NOLAND 1925). Grazing rates (+ SD):, 67*1276
bacteriaind.-r h-r, 1580+ 1110batceriaind.-rh-r, 1000-6000 bacteriaind.-rh-r, and 210 + 156picocyanobacteria
ind.-r h-r; clearance rates: 465 nl ind.-' h-' (bacteria) and I 180 nl ind.-' h-' (picocyanobacteria), ingestion of algae
>2 pm abolt 2 7o (SANDERS et al. 1989, SIMEK et al. 1995, 1996, 1998). Biomass of 106 specimens 8-17 mg
(cowELL 1960, DILLON & HOBBS 1973, NEBRAT t915, TAYLOR 1978, WIACKOWSKI et al. 1994),
according to FOISSNER (1987a) up to 27 mg. Respiration of 106 specimens about ll21tlOzhr (NEBRAT
1975). TAYLOR (1978) found a maximum specific growth rate of 0.072ht, corresponding to a generation time
of 14 h. MACEK et al. (1996) got a mean growth rate of 0.0175 h-r when using abundance changes in the epi-
and metalimnion (1422" C) of a eutrophic reservoir. According to BICK & KUNZE (1971) and TAYLOR
(1979a) often associated with Cyclidium spp.
NH+* and HzS are tolerated even in higher concentrations (+ Table), but only when oxygen is simultaneously
present (BICK 1958, WILBERT 1969). In expehments'with peptone as pollutant, H. grandinella occtrredwithin
the first five days after nitrification and with increasing oxygen (GREISER 1974, SCHMERENBECK 1915). h
disappeared after the application of 22.5 pgl-' Cu2t as CuSO+ (LELAND & KENT 1981). Lead was less toxic
than zinc, and mercury much more than zinc; however, the metals were not accumulated. Conversely,
FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS et al. (1985) found lead accumulation up to <500 pg l-'. In his experiments, H.
grandinella disappeared at lead >500 pg l-t, zinc >200 pg l-r, or mercury >2pgl'' (FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS
& ANTONIO-GARCIA 1986, 1988, FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS Et AI. 1987).
Halteria grandinella is obviously eurythermic (-+ Table), although some authors described it as thermophilic
(BERECZKY |TTTb,NOLAND 1925, TAMAR 1965). MATIS & STRAKOVÄ-SrrunsrOVÄ (1991) found it
in a brook and in two thermal lakes at 746.5" C and pH 5-7.5; HECKMAN (1974) recorded it in rice fields
from south-eastern Asia even at 10-50'C! Tolerates O.l5 Vo salt at direct application and up to 0.3 7o when
adapted (AX & AX 1960, FINLEY 1930). The latter value prevented excystment, which agrees with data by
KAHL (1928), who found H. grandinellaininland salt waters only at a03 %ö salt. Conversely, WILBERT &
KAHAN (1981) recorded it from the Red Sea and the Solar Lake, Israel, at 0.05-18 Eo salt cootent. However,
determinations were not proven by silver impregnation. Autecological data of limnetic populations -+ Table, for
terrestrial ones see FOISSNER & PEER (1985) and FOISSNER et al. (1985).
561

Oligotrichida
Table: Autecological data of Halteria grandinella. Column 1, from DETCHEY A (1972, 1975, 1979a, b, 1983a-c; many analyses from Bul-
garian running waters); column 2, from BERECZKY (1977b; many analyses from Hungarian part of the Danube River); column 3, from
BICK & KUNZE ( I 971; summary of data from literature, supplemented with data from LACKEY t 938, PATRICK I 961 , PATRICK et al.
196'7 , and FOISSNER et al. 1982); column 4, from BICK & KUNZE ( l97l; optimum values, supplemented with data from KRAMER 1964
on a mass occurrence).
Parameters References
1 2 Ja 4
Saprobity o,b,a,p b
Frequency (Vo) r-16.3
Temperature (o c) t0-29 t8-22 0.8-35 25
pH 7 .3-8.1 1.6-8.t 4.2-9.8 6.1-1 .5
o, (mg I') 2.5-t2.0 6.t-t}.2 0-3 8 0.t-9.7
Oz (saturation o/o) 6-133 0-360
BoDs (mg 1') 0.9-23.1 3.9-5.t 0.3-2.0
COD (mg 1') 3.3-1 11
HzS (mg 1') 0-2.3
Ca2* (mg I ') 32-658 3.6-101 t28
Mg'* (mg l') 0-136.2 0.3-29.3
Total hardness (dH') t2.8-46.4 0.8-21
COz (mg 1') 0-56 5-30
PO+3 -P (mg I ') 0.003-0,9
NH+*-N (mg 1-') 0-3.6 0.1-0.8 0-t9.4 0-1.6
NO: -N (mg 1') 0-1 0.6-1.3 0.1-0.4
1
NOz -N (mg I ') 0-0.3 0.01-0.1 0-0. l
Cl-(mg 1') 9.6-n t 0-29
Fe2* (mg I ') 0-2.2 0.0t-0.72 0.2-t.6
Salinity (7o) 0.04-0.05 0-0.35 freshw ater
Bacteria ml ' (plate method) 33-1 7 000 000 33-2250
Undisturbed cells of H. grandinella jump about 8 times per minute and spend I 7o of their time jumping (GIL-
BERT 1994). They jump on contact or near contact with the rotifer predator Syncheata pectinata, travelling a
mean distance of 0.37 mm (18 body lengths) at a mean velocity of 2.76 mm s-r (131 body lengths s-r). Maximum
velocity during escape jumps 3.7 mm s-r. Jumping requires 4l Eo of total metabolic rate and seems to be an effec-
tive defence against rotifer predation: only 12 Vo of 92 Halteria grandinella cells contacted or closely approached
by Syncheata pectinata were captured; all other cells jumped away.
Ecological summary: Recorded from all continents and a great variety of habitats, including soil where it indi-
cates wet or flooded conditions. Planktonic and benthic. Common at all seasons, eurythermic and very likely
holo-euryhaline. As a bacteria feeder, H. grandinella very likely indicates eutrophic or highly eutrophic condi-
tions, especially when occurring in considerable (>1000 ind. I 1) numbers. Resting cysts known. Saprobic classi-
fication according to FOISSNER et al. (1991): beta- to alphamesosaprobic (o = l, b = 6,a=3,I = 3, SI =2.2).
562

Oligotrichida
V
F
/AM
-UM
'..§'
MI
MA
CY
JB
I
7
Haheria grandinella (1, 2, from peURE-fRgUIET 1953; 3, from FOISSNER 1987a 4,8, from SONG 1993; 5,7, from
SONG & WILBERT 1989;6, from KAHL 1932. 1,2, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation; 3, in vivo and after protar-
gol impregnation; 4, 5, 8, protargol impregnation; 6,7, in vivo). 1, 2,4,8: Ventral and apical views of ciliary pattern.
Arrows mark ciliary rows. The arrowhead in (8) denotes three outer adoral membranelles at higher magnification. The sil-
verline system is narrowly meshed and extends in the whole cortex (l). 31 61 7z Ventral views, 30 pm, 30 trtm,25 pm. Note
that some bristles are bifurcated, as in -+ Halteria bifurcata; see also Figure 9. Figure 6 shows a middle divider, where the
adoral membranelles of the opisthe form a circle (arrow). 5: Ciliary row (umping bristle complex) at high magnification.
Arrows mark unciliated basal bodies. The arrangement and number of the basal bodies within a ciliary row are the most
important differences to the very similar -+ Halteria bifurcata. AM = outer (collar) membranelles of the adoral zone, CP =
cytopyge, CV = contractile vacuole, CY = cytopharynx, EP = excretory pore of contractile vacuole, F = fibres, FV = food
vacuoles, IM = inner (buccal) membranelles of adoral zone, JB = jumping bristles (cilia) or jumping bristle complexes (cili-
ary rows), MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, PB = peristomial bottom, UM = undulating membrane.
563



Oligotrichida
Itvl
18
Halteria grandinella ll7-22, originals; 23,24, tiom PETZ & FOISSNER 1992. 17 , 18, 20-22, protalgol irnpregnation; 19, irt vivo; 23, 24,
SEM). 17: Oral and nuclear apparatus. 18: Ciliary rows (arrows). 19: Resting cyst with mucous cover. 20: Oral ciliature. Arrow marks very
short ciliary row near proximal end of adoral zone (cp. 24).21: Structure of ciliary rows (arrows, arrowheads), which appears rather
variable; typical pattem marked by arrows. 22: Only very fortunate preparations show that the anterior bristles consist of two, and the poste-
rior of four basal bodies (cp. Fig. 5). 23: Ventral view of early divider. 24: Posterior view of late divider showing almost completed adoral
zone of posterior daughter. Arrow marks very short ciliary row (cp. 20). AM = outer adoral membranelles, IM = inner adoral membranelles,
MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, OP = oral primordium, SO = opisthe's ciliary row 1, UM = undulating membrane.
56s

Oligotrichida
Pelagohalteria cirrifera (KAHL, 1e32) FoISSNER, sKocsrAD & pRArr, 1988
1932 H alteria grandinella v ar. cirrifura KAHL, Tierwelt. Dtl., 25:- 505.
1935 Halteria cirrifura KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 840.
1962 Halteria cirrifera (KAHL, 1932) - LIEBMANN, Handbuch der Frischwasser- und Abwasser-Biologie I,
p.476 (in vivo observations, ecology, saprobiology).
1986 HalteriacirriferaKAHL, 1932-MAEDA,Bull.OceanRes.Inst.,Univ.Tokyo,2l:15 (revision).
1986 Halteria cirrifera KAHL, 1935 -DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS, Faune tropicale, 26:420 (revi-
sion of African species; brief redescription).
1988 Pelagohalteriq cirrfera (KAHL, 1932) - FOISSNER, SKOGSTAD & PRATT, J. Protozool., 35: 491
(combining authors).
l99l Pelagohalteria cirrifera (KAHL, 1932) FOISSNER, SKOGSTAD & PRATT, 1988 - FOISSNER, BLAT-
TERER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft,
U9l:144 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
1997 Pelagohalteria cirrifera (KAHL, 1935) FOISSNER, SKOGSTAD & PRATT, 1988 - AGATHA &
RIEDEL-LORJE, Arch. Protistenk., 148: 446 (authoritative redescription).
Taxonomy
KAHL (1932) described this species as variety of -+ Halteria grandinella. In 1935, he raised it to species rank.
FOISSNER et al. (1988) transferred H. cirrifera to Pelagohalteria because the arrangement of the jumping bris-
tles is as in -+ P. viridis, type of the genus.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 25-50 pm, after AGATHA & RIEDEL-LORJE (tggZ) 25-34 x22-34 pm.
2) Body globular to broadly fusiform (Fig. 1-3).
3) Macronucleus in mid-body. ellipsoidal to reniform (Fig.2,3, 6). KAHL's figure shows very likely a dividing
specimen as indicated by the nuclear figure and the oral anlage recognizable near the posterior end of the cell
(Fie. 1).
4) Contractile vacuole left of buccal cavity near mid-body (Fig. l*3).
s) Cytoplasm colourless, without symbiotic algae (Caution: Pelagohalteria cirrifera can be green due to
ingested algae! Differentiation of zoochlorellae and food vacuoles with green algae: zoochlorellae are about
5 pm across and located singly in the cytoplasm, that is, are not enclosed in a vacuole as ingested algae).
6) In equatorial area invariably 7 rather regularly spaced jumping bristle complexes, each composed of 8 basal
bodies bearing about 16 pm long bristles arranged in genus-specific manner, that is, in a meridional and a
horizontal row, each composed of 4 cilia; the horizontal row looks cimrs-like (Fig. 1-6).
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of prominent adoral zone of membranelles and very
inconspicuous undulating membrane at right margin of buccal cavity (Fig. l-6).2V23 adoral membranelles
grouped in 14-16 (mean = 15.1) outer (collar) membranelles encircling anterior body end and 6-7 inner (buc-
cal) membranelles extending into short buccal cavity.
8) Movement as conspicuous as in -+ Halteria, that is, jumping and rotating.
Similar species
-+ Pelagohalteria viridis has symbiotic green algae and a slightly higher number (8-1 I vs. 7) of bristle com-
plexes (ciliary rows). Furthermore, the meridional portion,of a bristle complex has slightly more and frequently
566

Oligotrichida
rather irregularly arranged cllia. Halteria spp. (-+ H. grandinella, -+ H. bifurcata) lack the horizontal part of the
bristle complexes (-+ taxonomy of -» P. viridis).Inexperienced observers may confuse P. cinfera with Meseres
(simple meridional rows of long cilia in middle third of cell), -+ Limnostrombidium and -+ Pelagostrombidium
(without jumping bristles; with conspicuous, needle-shaped extrusomes), ) Rimostrombidium (without jumping
bristles, adoral zone of membranelles forms a ring), and gymnostomatids such as -s Askenasia spp. (no adoral
membranelles but 3 ciliary belts consisting of many [about 50-60] ciliary rows) and -+ Mesodinium spp. (usually
smaller, no adoral membranelles). 5, 6, 7 (prominent adoral zone of membranelles) are key characters for
identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: According to KAHL (1932) and LIEBMANN (1962) common throughout the
year, often abundant, and always planktonic in clean, lentic waters. AGATHA & RIEDEL-LORJE (1997) found
9600 ind. Ir in August in brackish water (0.4 7o salt,22'C) at the German coast. We never found P. cirriftra.
All other records, not very many indeed, not documented by morphological data, thus confusion with other spe-
cies cannot be excluded: winter-plankton of a eutrophic pond in Germany, with a maximum abundance of
7000 ind.l-r in March (WILBERT 1969); high abundance in same pond from spring to autumn (BICK &
KUNZE 1911): 1200 ind. lr in 0-4 m of a eutrophic lake (Plußsee) in Germany during September and October
(RECK 1987); sewage polluted chalk stream near Vienna, Austria (WENINGER 1974); sandy sediment in the
Elbe River, Germany (GRIMM 1968); infrequent in the pelagial of a side branch of the Danube River in Hun-
gary (BERECZKY l99l); sediment (mud) of fertilized, acidic and unfertilized, iron and carbonate rich fishponds
in Poland (GRABACKA l91l); Florida lakes constituting a broad trophic gradient (BEAVER & CRISMAN
1989a); Benin, Africa (DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS 1936).
Autecological data: Possibly feeds mainly on algae, for instance, small (7 x 4 pm) pennate diatoms (AGATHA
& RIEDEL-LORJE 1997, BICK & KUNZE 1971, LIEBMANN 1962). Biomass of 106 individuals about 35 mg
(large specimens, FOISSNER et al. l99l), about 14 mg (30 pm across, our calculations), protargol-impregnated
specimens 4-10 mg (AGATHA & RIEDEL-LORJE 1997). BICK & KUNZE (1971) and RECK (1987; values in
parentheses) found P. cimfera under the following conditions: oligosaprobic;2.9-11.5'C (13.5-15.3), pH
1.4-8.8 (8.0-8.6), 1.4-38 mgl-r Oz (7.2-8.3), 12-360Vo Oz saturation (71-80), 0.1-l.9mglr NH+*-N,
0-1.2 mg 1r HzS. WENINGER (1914) found it at 640 pS cmr, pH 8.0-8.3, ll.4-21mg lr KMnO4-consumption,
23.5 dH" (total hardness),0.6-2 mg l-r NH+*-N,0.01-0.1 mg l-rNOz-N,1.2mg l-r PO43--P, 14-25 mglt Cl.
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Europe and tropical Africa. The reliable records indicate that P.
cirriftra is an oligo-stenohaline to meso-stenohaline, euplanktonic algal feeder, presumably occurring through-
out the year and preferring oligotrophic or mesotrophic conditions. Saprobic classification according to FOISS-
NER et al. (1991): oligosaprobic to betamesosaprobic (o = 6, b = 4,I = 3, SI = 1.4); according to LIEBMANN
(1962) rather sensitive to organic pollution.
561

Oligotrichida
AM
- lM
MA CV
OP
AM
MA
IM
MI
Pelagohalteriacirrifera (1, fiom KAHL 1932;2, fiom LIEBMANN 1962;3,5,6, fTom AGATHA a RIEOEI--I-ORIS
1997; 4, from DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS 1986. 1-3, in vivo; 4-6, protargol impregnation). 1-4: Ventral
views, 40 pm, 40 pm, 28 pm, 34 pm. 5, 6: Ciliary pattem of ventral and dorsal side, 18-27 pm. Arrowheads mark meridion-
ally arranged part of jumping bristle complexes; arrows denote horizontally arranged part of bristle complexes, which
appears cimrs-like. AM = outer (collar) membranelles of adoral zone, CV = contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuoles, IM =
inner (buccal) membranelles of adoral zone, JB = jumping bristles (in contrast to Halteria, the bristle complexes of Pelago-
halteria consist of a meridional and a horizontal, cirrus-like cluster of cilia), F = fibre connecting individual bristle com-
plexes, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, OP = oral primordium, UM = undulating membrane at right margin of buc-
cal cavity.
568

Oligotrichida
Pelagohalteria viridis (FRoMENrEL, tsi6) FoISSNER, SKoGSTAD & pRArr, 1988
1876 Halteria viridis FROMENTEL, Etudes Microzoaires , p.261.
1986 Halteria viridis FROMENTEL, 1874 - MAEDA, Bull. Ocean Res. Inst., Univ. Tokyo,2l: 2l (revision;
incorrect year).
1988 Pelagohalteria viridrs (FROMENTEL, 1876) - FOISSNER, SKOGSTAD & PRATT, J. Protozool., 35:
491 (authoritative redescription; establishment of genus Pelagohalteria with H. viridis as type).
1994 Pelagohalteria viridis - FOISSNER, Marine Microbial Food Webs, 8: 23 (generic key to oligotrich fresh-
water ciliates).
Taxonomy
A jumping bristle complex of Halteric DUJARDIN, 1841 consists of a single, roughly meridional ciliary row
(Fig. 5, 8 of + H. grandinella). In contrast, a bristle complex of Pelagohalteria is composed of two ciliary rows,
which are perpendicularly arranged (roughly L-shaped); the horizontal row appears cimrs-like due to the tight
spacing of the cilia (Fig. 1, 3,5,6,11,14, 16).
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 20-30 pm across.
2) Body urceolate, that is, usually rather distinctly at level of adoral zone of membranelles (Fig. I , 7 , 12 15 , l8).
Cortex thin, fragile; most individuals burst when touching the cover glass (at least in cultured material).
3) Macronucleus reniform near mid-body (Fig. 1, 4, 18). Micronucleus unknown.
4) Contractile vacuole left of buccal cavity near mid-body (Fig. 1).
5) Cytoplasm green due to about 30 symbiotic algae, most grouped in two clumps left and right of pharynx.
Algae 44 pm across, with distinct cell wall, a pyrenoid, and a red stigma (Fig. 1, 3,12, 15,16 and Fig. 9 on
p. 4); thus, they do not belong to Chlorella but to another, unidentified taxon.
6) In equatorial area 8-1 1 (usually 9) rather regularly spaced jumping bristle complexes, each composed of 6-l I
basal bodies bearing about 25 pm long bristles arranged in genus-specific manner, that is, in a meridional and
horizontal row, each composed of 3-5 cilia (Fig. 1-7, 9-17); number and arrangement of basal bodies in bris-
tle complexes highly variable (Fig. 5). Basal bodies of horizontal rows always in straight line, those of
meridional rows often randomly arranged. Half of individuals with at least one distally bifurcated bristle.
Although the horizontal row of the bristle complexes looks cimrs-like in the scanning electron microscope
(Fig. 11,14), each cilium can act independently.
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of prominent adoral zone of membranelles and very
inconspicuous undulating membrane at right margin of buccal cavity (Fig. 14,9-ll, 15, 18). 22-27 adoral
membranelles grouped in 15-18 (mean = 17) outer (collar) membranelles encircling anterior body end and
7-9 inner (buccal) membranelles extending into short buccal cavity. Cilia of outer membranelles about l5 pm
long.
8) Movement as conspicuous as in --> Halteria, that is, jumping and rotating.
Similar species
-+ Pelagohalteria cirrifera lacks symbiotic green algae and has a slightly lower number (7 vs. 8-ll) of bristle
complexes. Halteria chlorelligera KAHL, 1935 (40-50 pm; see FOISSNER et al. 1991, p. 134) and -» H. bifur-
cqta are also green-coloured due to symbiotic algae. However, -+ Halteria spp. lack the horizontal part of the
bristle complexes (-+ taxonomy). Inexperienced observers may confuse P. viridis with Meseres (simple
s69

Oligotrichida
meridional rows of long cilia in middle third of cell; PETZ & FOISSNER 1992), ) Limnostrombidium and -+
Pelagostrombidium (without jumping bristles; with conspicuous, needle-shaped extrusomes), -+ Rimostrombid-
ium (withottjumping bristles, adoral zone of membranelles forms a ring), and gymnostomatids such as -+ Aske-
nasia spp. (no adoral membranelles but 3 ciliary belts consisting of many [about 50-60] longitudinal ciliary
rows) and -+ Mesodinium spp. (usually smaller, no adoral membranelles). 5, 6, 7 (prominent adoral zone of
membranelles) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in lake plankton. FOISSNER et al. (1988) isolated P. viridis in August
from the open epilimnion of Lake Rpertjem at Nesodden, near Oslo, Norway. This is a shallow and small lake
(0.01 km'z) eutrophified by sewage and drainage from agricultural areas.
Further records: Lake Constance (Germany) with an annual mean abundance of 180-680 ind. l-1 in 0-8 m and
13-36 ind. lr in 8-20 m, having pronounced seasonality from June to September and a maximum abundance of
about 15 000 ind. 1-' in June (MÜLLER et al. 1991); Piburger See in Austria, a small, oligotrophic to meso-
trophic lake, in which P. viridis accounted for about 50 Ea oftotal ciliate abundance and 60 Ea oftotal ciliate bio-
mass at end of May (MACEK et al. 1996); mesotrophic lake (Mondsee) in Austria (SALBRECHTER & ARNDT
1994);2 410 000 ind. l-r in a hypereutrophic pond (Priest Pot) in England during August (FINLAY et al. 1996);
during thermal stratification dominant in the surface layer of a humic,. moderately acid lake and in an oligo.
trophic to mesotrophic lake in France (CARRIAS et al. 1994, 1996, 1998; as "mixotrophic Halteria
grandinella"); Lake Huron, USA (LAVRENTYEV et al. 1995). Pelagohalteria viridis also occurs in brackish
(5 Voo) waters (Fig. 12).
,
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria and algae. FOISSNER et al. (1988) used the cryptomonad Rhodomonas
lacustris as food supply. MÜLLER et al. 11991) maintained P. viridis for several months, using bacteria-rich sus-
pensions of senescent Rhodomonas cells as a food source. SKOGSTAD et al. (1987) found good or excellent
growth with Woloszynskia bostoniensis, Monochrysis, Mallomonas acaroides, Rhodomonas minuta, Chroo-
monas sp., Cryptomonas spp., Chlorella pyrenoidosa, and Haematococcus pluvialis. However, no algae >2 1rm
were ingested in the experiments by §IVIef et al. (1996). Grazing rates (+ SD): 799 + 469 bacteria cell-r h-r and
57 + 25 picocyanobacteria cell-r h ' (§IMEK et al. 1996) or llO-1320 bacteria cell-' h-r (CARRIAS et al. 1996);
clearance rates: 353 nl cell-r h-r (bacteria) and 841 nl cell-' h-l (picocyanobacteria; §fUBf et al. 1996) or
29-225 nl cell-r h ' (CARRIAS et al. 1996). Biomass of 106 individuals about 5.4-6.5 mg (CARRIAS et al. 1996,
MÜLLER et al. 1991, SKOGSTAD et al. l98l); medium-sized specimens according to our calculations about
t
8 mg. MACEK et al. (1996) obtained a mean growth ratö of 0.011 h when using abundance changes in the epi-
and metalimnion (9.5-16.5" C) of an oligotrophic to mesotrophic lake (Piburger See) in Austria.
Ecological summary: Possibly more common than indicated by literature data because very likely often con-
fused with -+ Halteria spp. ("mixotrophic halteriids"; see above). Euplanktonic. Possibly thermophilic because
peak abundances were found in the warm season. Feeds on bacteria and various algae. The symbiotic algae indi-
cate that Pelagohalteriaviridis presumably prefers, or at least can survive, oligotrophic conditions.
510

Oligotrichida
\
O1
aOo o'o
a'o
a
o aaoa .oa.a "'oo
III IV
II
a o.
t't
aa oo oo .'
t tt' o o at' oaar. taaaa
oaa aoao o"o' . 1a .... eoto ""'
VIII 5
VI
Pelagohalteriaviri.dis(l-6, f}omFOISSNERetal. 1988. l,invivo; 2-5,protargol in'rpregnation; 6,Chatton-LwofTsilver
nitrate impregnation). 1: Ventral view of typical specimen,30pm. Only some of the numerous symbiotic algae (zoochlorel-
1ae) are shown. 2-4: Ciliary pattem of frontal, ventral and dorsal side, 23 pm,2l pm, 23 pm. Arrows in (2) mark bristle
complexes (ciliary rows). 5: Variability of bristle complexes II-VI[. 6: Part of silverline system in posterior half of body.
AM = outer (collar) membranelles of adoral zone, C = cilia of inner (buccal) adoral membranelles, CV = contractile vacuole,
F = fibre connecting individual adoral membranelles, IM = inner (buccal) membranelles of adoral zone, JB = jumping bris-
tles (in contrastto Halteria, the bristle complexes of Pelagohalterla consist of a meridional and a horizontal, cirrus-like row
of cilia), MA = macronucleus, SA = symbiotic green algae (4-6 pm in diameter, with red stigma, about 30 cells per ciliate),
UM = undulating membrane, II-VII = bristle complexes.
5lr



Oligotrichida
,:::;:::'
AM
15
16
Pehgohalteria viridis (lT,.unpublished miclograph kindly supplied by T. LINDHOLM, Finland: l-3-18, originals ll'onr the eutrophic pond at
Salzburg University. 12, in vivo; 13, 14, scanning electron micrographs; 15-18, protargol impregnation). 12: Specimen from Husö Bay, a
slightly saline (5Voo) lake with freshwater macrophytes in Finland. Arrow marks bifurcated jumping bristle. 13, 14: Dorsal view of a late
divider. The horizontal portion (arrows) of the jumping bristles is clearly recognizable and distinctly different from --> Halteria grandinella.
L5, 18: Ventral view and optical section showing the urceolate body shape and the symbiotic green algae, which stain with protargol. 16, 17:
Posterior polar views showing some of the genus-specific jumping bristles, which are composed of a meridional (arrows) and a horizontal
(arrowhead) row of cilia, forming a L-shaped pattem. AM = outer (collar) membranelles of adoral zone, DAM = newly formed adoral mem-
branelles, IM = inner (buccal) membranelles of adoral zone, JB = jumping bristles, MA = macronucleus, PAM = parental adoral
membranelles, SA = symbiotic green algae.
573

Oligotrichida
Limnostrombidium pelagicum 1rAHL , ts3z) KRATNER, tsss
1932 S t r o mb idi um v ir ide forma p e I a g i c a KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 25 : 493.
l99l Strombidium pelagicrzm KRAINER, Europ. J. Protistol., 27: 62 (new synonym; homonym to S. viride
forma pelagica and thus replaced by S. pelagoviride shown in next entry).
1993 Strombidium pelagoviride (KRAINER, 1991) - KRAINER, Int. Congr. Protozool., 9: 68 (replacement
name for S. pelagicum KRAINER; new synonym).
1995 Limnostombidium pelagoviride (KRAINER 1993) - KRAINER, Lauterbornia,2l: 56 (redescription).
1995 Limnostrombidium pelagicum (KAHL, 1932) - KRAINER, Lauterbornia,2l: 54 (combining author).
Taxonomy
See taxonomy of -+ Pelagostrombidium fallax for generic classification. KAHL characterized this form as fol-
lows: small (40-60 pm), bulky obconical, yellowish, without symbiotic algae, pelagic in large water bodies.
KRAINER ( 199 1) stated that his S . pelagicum strongly resembles S . viride forma pelagica KAHL, except for the
number of collar (= outer adoral) membranelles (12 in KAHL's drawing vs. 16 in KRAINER's population).
However, this difference is small and concerns a character which KAHL, lacking the advantage of silver impreg-
nation, could not analyse in detail. Later, KRAINER (1995) himself supposed identity of these species.
D i f f e r e n t i a I d i a g n o s i s (further morphometric data, see Table below!)
1) Size in vivo 30-60 x 2545 pm, according to KRAINER's (1995) table usually about 40 x 30 pm. I
2) Body obconical, that is, narrowed posteriorly, 1-2 shallow equatorial furrows marking extrusome girdle
(Fig. 1, 2). Posterior half of cell with polygonal, cortical platelets difficult to recognize in vivo because
highly transparent (Fig. 1); plated portion often slightly detached in fixed cells, forming lorica-like structure
(Fig.3).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, globular or ellipsoidal. l-3 globular micronuclei (Fig. 1, 2,5-1).
4) Contractile vacuole possibly lacking. Neoformation organelle in posterior half of cell, forms long tube wid-
ened posteriorly, anterior tube end opens ventrally within extrusome girdle (Fig. 1-3, 5).
5) Cytoplasm colourless, without symbiotic algae or sequestered plastids; however, often packed with many col-
ourful granules, making cells greenish-grey or reddish-brown (Differentiation of zoochlorellae and food
vacuoles with green algae: zoochlorellae are about 5 !m across and located singly in the cytoplasm, i.e. are
not enclosed in a vacuole as ingested algae). Extrusomes serially arranged in equatorial girdle; individual ex-
trusomes needle-shaped, 16-23 pm long, form many posteriorly converging bundles (Fig. l, 2).
6) One circumferential ciliary row near mid-body immediately underneath extrusome girdle, composed of basal
body pairs having only one basal body ciliated with an abotil2 pm long, club-shaped bristle. Ventral ciliary
row in niurow cleft, extends from extrusome girdle to near posterior end of cell, composed of 7-10 (mean = 8)
basalbodypairs with shortbristles emergingfromanteriorbasalbodies (Fig. 1,3,5,6,8,9, 11).
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of prominent adoral zone of membranelles and incon-
spicuous undulating membrane at right margin of buccal cavity. Adoral zone of membranelles bipartited in
about 16 outer (collar) and 8-12 (mean - 9.1) inner (buccal) membranelles; collar membranelles form open
circle in frontal view (Fig. 3, 5, 10). Ventral opening of buccal cavity terminates distinctly above mid-body
(Fig. 1-7, 9-11).
8) Movement as in -+ L. viride, that is, vibrating some time and then suddenly jumping away.
Similar species
In vivo difficult to distinguish from -+ Limnostrombidium viride (usually 50-70 pm long, usually 12-16 inner
adoral membranelles, 13-18 basal body pairs in ventral ciliary row). -+ Pelagostrombidium spp. are in vivo and
574

Oligotrichida
after silver impregnation easily distinguished from Limnostrombidium spp. by the buccal cavity, which is deep
(long) in the former and flat (short) in the latter. Accordingly, the buccal (inner) zone of membranelles of -+ Pela-
gostrombidiuiz extends meridionally (parallel to main body axis) to near posterior body end, whereas that of Lim-
nostrombidium extends almost horizontally (perpendicular to main body axis) near the anterior body end. Com-
parison with further taxa --> L. viride. 5 (with extrusome girdle), 7 (number and arrangement of inner mem-
branelles) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: KAHL (1932) discovered L. pelagicum in several lakes in Germany. KRAINER
(1991, 1995) found it in excavated, eutrophic groundwater ponds in Styria, Austria; it achieved highest numbers
and biomasses, that is, 740 ind.l-r and 18.5 mg m-3 at I m and 258 ind. l-r and 6.5 mg m-3 at 3 m in August; lower
abundances, not exceeding 200 ind. 1-r, were found throughout the year. We found L. pelagicum in Lake Con-
stance (Fig. 6) and in the pond at Salzburg University (Fig. 7-11, Table), with characters exactly matching those
described by KAHL (1932) and KRAINER (1991, 1995). Records not substantiated by illustrations: Ladoga
Lake, Russia (SMIRNOVA 1987); up to'77 irrd.l-r in Lake Onega, Russia (MAZHEIKAITE 1969); sometimes
dominant in stagnant water bodies (e.g. ponds, reservoirs, sub-Arctic tundra lake) of the USSR (BELOVA 1989,
1994, LAVRENTYEV 1989, OLEKSIV 1985, ZHARIKOV 1983, 1992);84 ind. lr (spring), 30 ind. 1-r (sum-
mer), and 23 ind.l-r (autumn) in the Volga River plankton, USSR (MAMAYEVA 1915).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Probably feeds mainly on algae. Biomass of 106 specimens about
30 mg (our calculations). BELOVA (1989) fowd Limnostrombidium pelagicum at 10.6-21.4 oC. Possibly more
coflrmon than indicated by literature data because likely often not separated from other strombidiids, especially -+
L. viride. So far recorded only from Eurasia.
-AM
W
AM
UM
TF
IM
CR
NO
MA
M I VR NO
PO L
Limnostronüidium pelagicum 1 1 , -j-5, lionr KRAINER 199 1 , 199-5; 2, fiorn KAHL 1932. 1, 2, in vivo: -l--5, protargol inrple gnationl. 1, 2:
Ventral views,30 pm,50 pm.3-5: Ventral and frontal (4) views of ciliature, 35-40 pm. Arrowheads mark grid above circumferential ciliary
row. AM = outer (collar) membranelles of adoral zone, CR = circumferential ciliary row, E = extrusome bundles, IM = inner (buccal) mem-
branelles of adoral zor,e,L = lorica-like structure formed by cortical platelets, Ma = macronucleus, MI = micronuclei, NO = neoformation
organelle, POP = polygonal cortical platelets, TF = transverse fibres, UM = undulating membrane, VR = ventral ciliary row.
5ts



Oligotrichida
Limnostrombidium viride (srErN, 1867) KRATNER, ree5
1861 Strombidium viride STEIN, Organismus der Infusionsthiere II, p. 163 (without illustration).
1899 Strombidium viride STEIN - ROUX, Revue suisse Zool., 6: 610 (first illustration).
1920 Strombidium viride STEIN - PENARD, Revue suisse Zool., 28: 1 (authoritative redescription from life).
1922 Strombidiumviride STEIN 1861 - PENARD, Etudes Infusoires, p.219 (slightly shortened version of the
1920 paper).
1932 Strombidium viride STEIN, 1859 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 25: 492 (first reviser; incorrect dating).
1985 Strombidium viride STEIN, 1861 - MAEDA & CAREY, Bull. Ocean Res. Inst., Univ. Tokyo, 19: 17 (re-
vision).
1989 Strombidium viride - ROGERSON, FINLAY & BERNINGER, Trans. Amer. microsc. Soc., 108: 117
(light and electron microscopic study).
1991 Strombidium viride STEIN, 1861 - FOISSNER, BLATTERER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informations-
berichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll9l: 146 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and
ecological monograph).
1995 Limnostrombidium viride (STEIN 1867) - KRAINER, Lauterbomia,2l: 54,56 (combining author; rede-
scription from life and after silver impregnation).
Taxonomy
See taxonomy of -+ Pelagostt"ombidium fallax for generic classification. KAHL (1932) distinguished three types
of Limnostrombidium viride: the typical, Iarge (80 pm), obconical form, which is usually green due to, symbiotic
and ingested algae (Fig. 3); a smaller (about 60 pm), slender, posteriorly almost pointed form with symbiotic al-
gae having a stigma (Fig. 4); and the 40-60 pm long, bulky, obconical forma pelagica, which lacks symbiotic al-
gae. We consider the latter (now -+ L. pelagicum) as senior synonym of L. pelagoviride (KRAINER, 1995).
Strombidium yiride sensu DRAGESCO (1963) and BORROR (1963) from salt waters do not have a neoforma-
tion organelle (-+ character 4), indicating misidentification.
Differential diagnosi
s
l) Size in vivo 40-90 x 30-55 pm, usually 50-70 x 4045 pm.
2) Body obconical, that is, narrowed posteriorly, 1-2 shallow equatorial furrows marking extrusome girdle (Fig.
1,3, 5, 12, 18,25,29). Posterior half of cell with polygonal, cortical platelets (about l-2 pm across) difficult
to recognize in vivo because highly transparent; plated portion often slightly detached in fixed cells, forming
lorica-like structure (Fig. 1, 3, 5, 10, 16,19-21).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, globular or ellipsoidal . I or 2 micronuclei (Fig. I , 5).
1) Contractile vacuole possibly lacking; PENARD (1920) and KAHL (1932) described a ring-canal near mid-
body, supposedly having osmo-regulatory function (Fig. 7). Neoformation organelle in posterior half of cell,
forms long tube widened posteriorly, anterior tube end opens ventrally within extrusome girdle (Fig. 1, 3,
6-9. r3, 16.26).
s) Cytoplasm greenish or yellowgreen due to about fifty sequestered plastids (i.e. the functional plastids of in-
gested Chlorophyceae, llkely Kirchneriella), 6 x 3.2;rm in size, and food vacuoles with spotted contents
(Fig. I , 5, 14, 16 and Fig. 1 on p. 4). Extrusomes serially arranged in 4-7 pm wide, equatorial girdle; individ-
ual extrusomes needle-shaped, 16-22;rm long, form 12-16 posteriorly converging bundles with about 20 ex-
trusomes each (Fig. l, 3, 5, 13, 16, 20, 22, 23, 26, 29).
6) One circumferential ciliary row near mid-body immediately underneath extrusome girdle, composed of basal
body pairs having only one basal body ciliated with an about2pm long, club-shaped bristle. Ventral ciliary
row in narow cleft, extends meridionally from extrusome girdle to near posterior end of cell, composed of
13-18 (mean = 15.5) basal body pairs with short bristles emerging from anterior basal bodies (Fig. l, 6, 10,
1 1, 13, 17, 20, 21, 26, 28-31).
517

Oligotrichida
7) Oral apparatus occupies alterior end of cell, consists of prominent adoral zone of membranelles and incon-
spicuous undulating membrane at right margin of buccal cavity. Adoral zone of membranelles bipartited in
about 16 outer (collar) and 6-16 (usually 12-16, mean = 15.1; KRAINER 1995) inner (buccal)
membranelles; collar membranelles form open circle in frontal view (Fig. 6, 27, 3O); buccal membranelles
discontinuous with outer ones and extending obliquely in flat buccal cavity. Ventral opening of buccal cavity
terminates distinctly above mid-body (Fig. l, 6, 12-l 4, ll, 24, 27 -31).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, slightly vibrating for some time and then jumping away suddenly. Fast for-
ward swimming by counter-clockwise rotation about main body axis.
Similar species
In vivo difficult to distinguish from -+ Limnostrombidium pelagicum (30-60 pm long, 8-12 inner adoral mem-
branelles, 7-10 basal body pairs in ventral ciliary row). --> Pelagostrombidium spp. are in vivo and after silver
impregnation easily distinguished from Limnostrombidium spp. by the buccal cavity, which is deep (long) in the
former and flat (short) in the latter. Accordingly, the buccal (inner) zone of membranelles of -+ Pelagostrombid-
ium extends meridionally (parallel to main body axis) to near posterior body end, whereas that of Limnostrom-
bidium extends almost horizontally (perpendicular to main body axis) near the anterior body end. Strombidium
rehwaldiPETZ & FOISSNER, 1992 is smaller (40 x 30 pm), almost colourless, has 2 extrusome girdles, lacks a
neoformation organelle, and is possibly confined to benthic habitats of running waters. The adoral zone of mem-
branelles of strobilidiids (Strobilidium caudatum, see FOISSNER et al. 1991,p.153; -+ Rimostrombidium spp.)
and -+ tintinnids forms a closed circle. In addition, Strobilidium and Rimostrombidium have at least 3 slightly
spiralling ciliary rows along * pronounced cortical ridges, lack extrusomes, and usually have a semicircular mac-
ronucleus underneath the adoral zone of membranelles. -+ Halteriids have conspicuous jumping bristles and lack
extrusomes. 5 (with extrusome girdle), 7 (number and arrangement of buccal membranelles) are key characters
for identification.
Ecology
Very likely, previously often not separated from -+ L. pelagicum!
Occurrence and distribution: Common throughout the year and sometimes abundant; obviously without dis-
tinct preference for a specific trophic level. Also in the plankton, occasionally even in the upper sediment layer
(BARTSCH & HARTWIG 1984) of large running waters, e.g., up to 7 ind.l-t in the Danube River in Hungary
(BERECZKY 1977, NOSEK & BERECZKY 1981, 1994) andup to 3000 ind. l-' in the Volga River in the USSR
(MAMAEVA 1979); only occasionally in small running waters (HEUSS 1976, LIEPA 1986).
Many records from lakes, ponds, and reservoirs: eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria (Fig. 1, 17-31);
small, meromictic lake in Upper Austria (NAUWERCK 1996); large Alpine lakes (RUTTNER 1937); about
25 000 ind. l-t in a eutrophic pond in Bonn, Germany, in April (WILBERT 1969); mesotrophic and polytrophic
Eifel maar lakes, Germany (PACKROFF 1992): mesotrophic Lake Windermere and a productive pond
(12 000 ind. l'1 in July) in England (FINLAY et al. 1988, LAYBOURN-PARRY & ROGERSON 1993, PERRISS
etal.1994); eutrophic Lake Aydat in French "Massiv Central" (SIME-NGANDO & HARTMANN 1991); brown-
coloured humic and moderately acidic lake in central France (AMBLARD et al. 1995, CARRIAS et al. 1994);
Lake Constance, Germany (Fig. 15); lake in Switzerland (ANDRE 1915); reservoirs (up to 132 ind. lt), lakes, and
hatchery ponds in the USSR (e.g. ALEKPEROV 1982, 1984a ALEKPEROV & KRYUCHKOY 1982,
KRAVCHENKO 1969, LIYEPA 1984a, b, OLEKSIV 1985, SHCHERBAKOV 1969, ZHARIKOV 1983, 1992,
-+ Ecogram on p. 310); at0-14 oC in Lake Baikal (GAJEWSKAJA 1933); up to 4200 ind. l-1 in an Arctic lake of
Russia (LAVRENTYEY 1994); up to 12100 ind. l-t in McCloud Lake, a small, oligotrophic, acidic (pH 4.7) water
body as well as in an oligotrophic, organically coloured lake and in many oligo-, meso-, eu- and hypetrophic
lakes in Florida (BEAVER & CRISMAN 1989a,1990, BEAVER et al. 1988; BIENERT etal.l99l, see Ecogram
1 by -+ Stentor amethystinus); up to 47 000 ind.lt in Lake Erie, USA, during summer (HWANG & HEATH
1997); dominant during early stratification (June) in Lake Huron and Lake Michigan (CARRICK & FAHNEN-
578

Oligotrichida
STIEL 1990, CARRICK et al. 1991); Antarctic lakes (LAYBOURN-PARRY & MARCHANT 1992,
LAYBOURN-PARRY et al. 1991, 1997);Lake Tanganyika (HECKY & KLING 1981; as Stombidium cf . viride).
STEIN (1867) discovered L. viride in peat-cuttings, and GROLIERE (1977) counted up to 23 000 ind. l-r between
Sphagnum of a mountain lake in September. A direct transfer from freshwater to 0.5 7o brackish water is survived
(AX & AX 1960), and AGAMALIEV (1986) found I. viride in low salinity lagoons of the Caspian Sea.
Terrestrial records are very likely misidentifications, because FOISSNER (1987a, 1998) never found L. viride in
such habitats although resting cysts are formed (Fig. 15). DINGFELDER (1962) observed it occasionally in forest
puddles (up to T25 000 ind. I '), and KRAMER (1964) recorded it from infusions of dried pond sediment.
Autecological data: Mixotrophic (ROGERSON et al. 1989, SANDERS 1991). Feeds on diatoms (Cyclotella),
green algae (Kirchneriella), flagellates, and very likely also on bacteria (ROGERSON et al. 1989). Biomass of 106
specimens: 15.3 mg (SIME-NGANDO & HARTMANN 1991; preservedin2.5 7o HgClz; very low value indicat-
ing misidentification), 50 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1991, LUK'JANOVIÖ 1973, NEBRAT 1915), 51.5 mg (PER-
RISS et al.1994; preserved inl VoLlugol's Iodine),90 mg (NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991).
Mean chlorophyll-a content 160 pg cell-r, photosynthetic rates at irradiation levels of 55, 155, and 189 pE m-2 s-t
18 x6.7,43 + 16.3, and 54 t 18.3 pgCcell-tht (t 95 7o CL; PERRISS etal. 1994).In the productive Lake
Carter, L. viride was estimated to contribute about 0.5 7o of community primary production at mid-July (PERRISS
et al. 1994). NEBRAT (1975), who counted 5303 ind. l-' with a biomass of 0.265 mg l-1 in a Russian reservoir, cal-
culated an oxygen consumption of 386 pl h-' for 106 specimens. KUZNETSOVA & ARSLANOVA (1981) found
abolt 2140 ind. l-' in a Russian pond in July, with a yearly biomass-production of about 90 mg m-3 and an annual
production/biomass quotien of 0-293. According to FINDENEGG (1953), L. viride occurred at 2.8-22 oC, with
an optimum between 5-15 'C (spring and autumn) and a maximum abundance at 10.5'C. ROGERSON et al.
(1989), who found L. viride in a shallow (maximum depth 3.6 m) eutrophic pond in the English Lake District, ob-
served maximum densities (13 000 ind. lt) in June. At the onset of winter mixis, densities fell to about 100 ind. l-';
it was never observed below 2 m, that is, in the anoxic water. TAYLOR (1984), who found up to 3000 ind. l-r in
Lake Ontario (North America), provided interesting data on phosphorus cycling. Autecological data -+ Table.
Table: Autecological data of Limnostrotnbidium viride. Column 1" from NOLAND (1925; 10 analyses from 8 water bodies in the USA);
column 2, from BICK (1972a; unknown number of analyses from various waters in Germany); columns 3 and 4, from RECK (1987; many
analyses from a lake [Plußsee] in Germany; column 4 includes only data at >500 ind. 1-'); column 5, from BERECZKY & NOSEK (1993;
many analyses from River Danube in Hungary).
Parameters References
1 2 Ja 4 5
Temperature ('C) 1 .8-15.5 1.5-16.5 3.9-21 8.5-18.2 2.2-2t.7
pH 1.2-8.3 6.t-8.2 7 .3-9.5 8.6-9.1 t .6-9.0
o, (mg 1') 2.4-t3.6 0.1-t2.0 0.2-t5.9 6.5-1 3. 1 6.9-15.9
Oz (saturation 7o) 28.4-t4t 2-t63 6t-tt9
COD (mg l') 4.9-t1.2
NH+*-N (mg 1') 0-5.9 0.02-0.35 0.03-0.04 0.04-0.53
NO: -N (mg 1') 0-3.62
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded only from Eurasia and Antarctica. Usually pelagic, rarely benthic.
Common at all seasons, eurythermic and oligo-euryhaline. Very likely without preference for a specific trophic
level, possibly because of its wide food range (autotrophy, bacteria, algae, flagellates) and/or confusion with -+
L. pelagicum. Resting cysts known (Fig. 15). Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et al. (1991):
betamesosaprobic (o = 1, b = 8, a = 1, I = 4, SI =2.0).
579

Oligotrichida
CR
VR
I
6
Limnostrombi.dium viride (1, äom FOISSNER et al. l99l; 2, fiom ROUX 1899;3,4, fiom KAHL 1932;5, 10, from KRAINER 1995;6,
original;7-9, from PENARD 1920; ll,from FOISSNER etal.1991. l-5,7-9, invivo;6, 10, 11, protargol impregnation).1-3,5,7: Ventral
views oftypical specimens, length 75-80 pm. Arrowhead in (l) marks ventral opening ofneoformation organelle. Arrow in (7) marks circu-
lar canal of unknown (excretory?) function. 4: Unnamed variety with symbiotic algae having a stigma, 60 pm (-+ taxonomy). 6, 10: Oral
and somatic ciliary pattem ald neoformation organelle in ventral and lateral view. Arrow marks dista.l inner (buccal) adoral membranelle. 8,
9: Neoformation organelle in a non-dividing specimen and an early divider. 11: Detail of equatorial region. Large arrow marks a fine-
meshed grid above the circumferential ciliary row, which is composed of basal body pairs (anowhead) bearing club-shaped bristles (small
anow). AM = outer (collar) membranelles of adoral zone, AN = anlage of outer adoral membranelles, CR = circumferential ciliary row, E =
extrusomes, IM = inner (buccal) membranelles of adoral zone,L = loricalike structure made of cortical platelets, MA = macronucleus, NO =
neoformation organelle (during morphogenesis, at least the oral anlagen originate in this tubular organelle, Fig. 10), p§ = peristomial
bottom, UM = undulating membrane, VR = ventral ciliary row.
580

Oligotrichida
." , ,
.,...l ..l..i .l......i.l.iL*..l..i$.iil"".r.".:'i " '' ,,, ,,, ',,'
$s
Limnostrombidium viride \12-14, 16, fiom FOISSNER et al. l99l; 15, kindly supplied by Dr. H. VtÜt-lER. Constauce. l2-14, 16, in vivo
bright field micrographs; 15, scanning electron micrograph). 12: Resting specimen showing typical body shape. Arrow marks short, inner
(buccal) array of adoral membranelles. 13, 14: Slightly squeezed specimen at different focal planes, showing right margin (arrow in 13) of
buccal cavity, equatorial girdle formed by bundles of extrusomes, neoformation organelle, and sequestered plastids. Arrow in (14) marks
bristles ofcircumferential ciliary row. 15: Flask-shaped resting cyst with the aperture (arrowhead) closed by a plug. Note that the surface is
smooth, that is, not covered with fine spines as in -+ Pelagostrombidiumfallax.16: Posterior portion of cell showing various cytoplasmic in-
clusions, the neoformation organelle (anows), and polygonal, cortical platelets 1-2 pm across. AM = outer (collar) membranelles of adoral
zone, E = needle-shaped extrusomes or extrusome girdle formed by 12-16 bundles, FV = food vacuoles, IM = inner (buccal) membranelles
of adoral zone, NO = neoformation organelle (during morphogenesis, at least the oral anlagen originate in this tubular structure), POP = po-
lygonal, cortical platelets covering posterior half of cell, SC = sequestered chloroplasts (i.e. functional plastids from ingested algae), VR =
ventral ciliary row composed of 13-18 basal body pairs.
581

Oligotrichida
:::::::: :.::::::/.\ :1f
Limnostrombidium viride \11 , 2l, fiom FOISSNER et al. 199 I ; 18-20, 22,23, originals. All fiom population of pond at Sal-
zburg University. 17,20, scanning electron micrographs; 18, in vivo, bright field; 19,21-23, in vivo, differential interference
contrast). 17: Oblique frontoventral view. Arrow marks circumferential ciliary row. 18: Resting specimen showing typical
body shape. 19: Extrusome and part of lorica, which consists of minute, polygonal platelets. 20: Detail of equatorial area
showing extrusome girdle and circumferential ciliary row (CR), underneath of which the plateleted lorica commences (cp. Fig.
19,2l). Arrows mark edges of individual extrusome bundles. 21: Posterior part of cell with polygonal platelets at high magni-
fication. Arrow denotes the opening of the tubular neoformation organelle (cp. Fig. 1,16,26).22,23zExtrtsomes from the
extrusome girdle (cp. Fig. 20). Arrow marks slightly set-off extrusome head. AM = outer (collar) membranelles of adoral
zone, CR = circumferential ciliary row, E = extrusomes, IM = inner (buccal) membranelles of adoral zone, MA = macronu-
cleus, MI = micronucleus, POP = polygonal cortical platelets, UM = undulating membrane, VR = ventral ciliary row.
582

Oligotrichida
Limnostrombidium viride (24-27, original scanning electron micrographs). 24: Ventral view. Arrow marks buccal vertex and inner (buccal)
adoral membranelles, which are, contrary to KRAINER's statement, distinctly separate from the outer membranelles and extend obliquely to
midline in the very flat buccal cavity. 25:. Dorsal view. 7t Limnostombidium, the circumferential extrusome and ciliary girdle are at or near
mid-body, whereas they are undemeath the adoral zone of membranelles in -+ Pelagostrombidium.26z Yenfial view of posterior body half
showing extrusome girdle, circumferential ciliary row, ventral ciliary row in a narrow cleft, and opening (arrow) of the tubular neoformation
organelle. 2TzFrontal view showing oral ciliature and extrusome girdle. Arrowhead marks inner (buccal) adoral membranelles; large arrow
denotes undulating membrane; small arrows mark edges of extrusome bundles. AM = outer (collar) membranelles of adoral zone, CR = cir-
cumferential ciliary row, E = extrusomes, VR = ventral ciliary row.
583



Oligotrichida
P elago strombidium fallax (zACHARTAS, 1 8es) KRAINER, I ee 1
1895 Psilotrichafallax ZACHARIAS, ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 3: 75.
1932 Strombidium(Psilotricha)fallax(ZACHARIAS, 1896)-KAHL,TierweltDtl.,25:493(firstreviser).
l99l Pelagostombidium fallax (ZACHARIAS, 1896) - KRAINER, Europ. J. Protistol., 27: 66 (authoritative
redescription; combining author; incorrect dating).
Taxonomy
Pelagostrombidium (type: -+ Stombidium mirabile PENARD, 1916) was established by KRAINER (1991) for
Strombidium species with a globular neoformation organelle (-+ character 4; gives raise to the daughter oral ap-
paratus), completely reduced somatic cilia, and a ventrally interrupted extrusome girdle. In -s Limnostrombid-
iarn KRAINER, 1995 (type: -+ Strombidium viride STEIN,1867), the neoformation organelle is tubular, a cir-
cumferential and a ventral ciliary row are present, and the extrusome girdle is continuous. -s Strombidium CLA-
PAREDE & LACHMANN, 1859 (type: Strombidion sulcarum CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN, 1859; incorrect
original spelling, see PETZ & FOISSNER 1992) very likely lacks a neoformation organelle, as do all (most?)
marine strombidiids (AGATHA & RIEDEL-LORJE 1997, PETZet al. 1995).
KAHL (1932) and MAEDA & CAREY (1985) synonymized P. fallax and -+ P. mirabile. Although this might
be correct, we keep them separate, as did KRAINER (1991), because we recently observed two different types in
the same sample: one form, which we identified as -» P. mirabile, was yellow-green and had a mean size of
43 x 38 pm; the second form, which was distinctly reddish-brown due to countless, minute cytoplasmic granules
(not by sequestered plastids!), had a mean size of 10x61 pm. The reddish type we would like to identify as P.
fallaxbecause ZACHARIAS (1895) mentioned that it has a colour like a dinoflagellate. Possibly, the number of
inner (buccal) membranelles is also different (12-17 vs.19-22; KRAINER 1991). Consequently, Pelagostom-
bidiumfallax from Lake constance (MÜLLER & GELLER 1993,PETZ & FOISSNER 1992) is -+ P. mirabile
because it is yellow-green and has only l4-ll inner adoral membranelles (see Fig. 15,22by -+ P. mirabile).
Differential diagnosis
l) Size in vivo 40-90 x 40-80 pm according to literature data,65--77 x 60-65 pm (70.3 x 60.8 pm, n = 6) in the
Wallersee population we investigated.
2) Body at first glance ellipsoidal or obconical, that is, posteriorly narrower than anteriorly (Fig. 2, 8); when
viewed more accurately, however, amphoriform because collar bearing adoral membranelles distinctly nar-
rower than shoulder bearing extrusome girdle (Fig. 1); almost completely covered with polygonal cortical
platelets 24trtm across, which are very transpa"rent and thus difficult to recognize (Fig. 10); plated portion
often slightly detached in fixed specimens, forming lorica-like structure (Fig. 6).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, ellipsoidal. Micronucleus ellipsoidal (Fig. 1).
4) Contractile vacuole possibly lacking. Neoformation organelle in posterior body half, composed of a globular
embryonic body and a long tube, which opens ventrally near the proximal end of the adoral zone (Fig. 1).
s) Cytoplasm distinctly orange due to countless, minute (<0.5 pm) pigment granules, which are preserved in
mercuric chloride fixed cells and give specimens a dark colour in transmitted light micrographs (Fig. 8, 9 and
Fig. 2 on p. 4); furthermore, the cytoplasm contains greenish, sequestered chloroplasts, which may be mis-
taken as symbiotic algae. Extrusome girdle undemeath adoral zone of membranelles interrupted at ventral
opening of buccal cavity; extrusomes serially arranged, needle-shaped and anteriorly knobbed, 15-20 pm
long, form several bundles with numerous organelles each (Fig. 1-5, l1).
6) Circumferential row closely underneath extrusome girdle, likely as in -+ P. mirabile composed of unciliated
basal bodies, interrupted ventrally according to KRAINER (1991; Fig. 1,6,7).
585

Oligotrichida
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of prominent adoral zone of membranelles on conspicu-
ous collar and inconspicuous undulating membrane on right wall of buccal cavity. Adoral zone of mem-
branelles bipartited in 15-16 collar and l9-Z2buccal membranelles; collar membranelles form open circle in
frontal view; buccal membranelles discontinuous with outer ones and extending straight into deep buccal cav-
ity ending below mid-body. Ventral opening of buccal cavity terminates near mid-body (Fig. 1, 6, 7, 8-1 1).
8) Swims very fast.
Similar species
Separation from the type species, -+ Pelagostrombidium mirabile, see second paragraph of taxonomy section. -+
Limnostrombidium spp. are in vivo easily distinguished from Pelagostrombidium spp. by the buccal cavity,
which is flat (short) in the former and deep (long) in the latter. Accordingly, the buccal (inner) zone of mem-
branelles of Limnostrombidium extends almost horizontally (perpendicularly to main body axis) near the ante-
rior body end, whereas that of Pelagostrombidium extends meridionally (parallel to main body axis) to near pos-
terior body end. Strombidium rehwaldi PETZ & FOISSNER, 1992 is smaller (40 x 30 pm), almost colourless,
has 2 distinct extrusome girdles, lacks a neoformation organelle, and is possibly confined to benthic habitats of
running waters. The adoral zone of membranelles of strobilidäds (Strobilidium caudatum, see FOISSNER et al.
1991, p. 153; -+ Rimostrombidium spp.) and -+ tintinnids forms a closed circle. In addition, Strobilidium and Rl-
*
mostrombidium have at least 3 slightly spiralling ciliary rows near pronounced cortical ridges, lack conspicu-
ous extrusomes, and usually have the sernicircular macronucleus undemeath the adoral zone of membranelles. -+
Halteriids have conspicuous jumping bristles and lack extrusomes. 5 (orange cytoplasm) andl are key characters
identification.
for
I
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: ZACHARIAS (1895) discovered Pelagostrombidium fallax in a lake (Großer
Plöner See) of northern Germany in May. KRAINER (1991) found it in eutrophic groundwater ponds of Styria,
Austria, with highest numbers in May (876 ind. lt , 2l .3 mg mr) and August (177 6 ind. | | , 43.3 mg m-t). Further
records: rare in a mesotrophic lake (Wallersee) near the city of Salzburg in 40 m depth on June 16, 1997 (Fig.
8-11); in May up to about 800 ind. l-1 in the epilimnion (up to about 200 ind. l-1 in the metalimnion) of an oligo-
trophic to mesotrophic alpine lake (Piburger See) in Tyrol (MACEK et al. 1996, SIMEK et al. 1996); small,
meromictic lake in Upper Austria (NAUWERCK 1996); dominant throughout the year in Lake Constance, Ger-
many (MÜLLER 1996, MÜLLER & WIINSCH 1998; but see comment in legend to Figures 12-17); rare in
mesosaprobic reservoirs of Azerbaijan (ALEKPEROY 1982, 1984a); tp to 2 ind. l-' in the plankton of the Da-
nube River in Hungary @ERECZKY 1972,1977, NOSEK & BERECZKY 1981); rivers in Peruvian Amazon
area (CAIRNS 1966).
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria, picocyanobacteria and algae, such as small diatoms and dinoflagellates
(KAHL 1932, KRAINER 1991, §n4nf et al. 1996). Biomass of 106 specimens 25 mg 1§fUnf et al. 1996; pre-
served cells) to l2O mg (our calculations). Mean growth rate about 034 dt, as calculated from abundance
changes in an oligotrophic to mesotrophic alpine lake at9.5-16.5 "C (MACEK et al. 1996; data from Lake Con-
stance population, see Table on p.3a). Grazing rates according to SIMEK et al. (1996: t SD): 136 t lol
bacteria cell-r h-' and 16 + 2l picocyanobacteria cell-l h-1; ingestion of algae greater that 2 pm about 18 7o; clear-
ance rates 62 nl cell-t h-l (bacteria) and 239 nl cell-r h-' (picocyanobacteria). In Lake Constance, Pelagostrombid-
iumfallax encysted from March to June and September to November (Fig. 12-17 and Fig. 3.6 on p. 35). Maxi-
mum flux rates of 1.8 x 105 cysts m-2 d-' and 2.1 x 10s cysts m-2 d-r were observed in spring and autumn, respec-
tively. In summer, cyst formation ceased over a period when water temperatures were >18 oC close to lake sur-
face. Encystment of P. fallax in spring was negatively correlated with chlorophyll a (MÜLLER & WÜNSCH
1998).
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded only from Europe. Euplanktonic. Common, possibly a spring ciliate.
Resting cyst formation known.
586

Oligotrichida
Pelagostrombidiumfallax (1,3-7, frorn KRAINER l99l; 2,from ZACHARIAS 1895. l-5, in vivo;6,7, protargol impreg-
nation). 1, 2: Ventral views, 50 pm, 80 pm. Arrow in (1) denotes fine-meshed grid (extrusome girdle) closely above circum-
ferential basal body row. 3: Needle-shaped extrusome with knobbed anterior end, 15-20 prm long. 4: Outline of representa-
tive specimen. Dotted area marks food accumulation. Arrowhead denotes ridges separating individual adoral membranelles.
5: Shape variants. 6, 7: Ventral and oblique anterior polar view of ciliary pattem, 50 pm. Arrow in (6) denotes U-shaped fi-
bres extending in buccal vertex, arrow in (7) marks fine-meshed grid of extrusome girdle. AM = outer (collar) membranelles
of adoral zone, CR = circumferential basal body row, E = needle-shaped extrusomes arranged in several bundles, IM = inner
(buccal) membranelles of adoral zone, L = loricalike structure, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, NO = neoforma-
tion organelle with globular embryonic body and tube (during cell division, at least the oral anlagen originate in this organ-
elle), POP = polygonal cortical platelets, UM = undulating membrane.
587

Oligotrichida
I
Pelagostrombidium fallax (8-ll, mercuric chloride preserved specimens fiom a population collected in the Wallersee, a
lake in Salzburg, Austria. 8, 9, bright field micrographs; 10, I l, Normarski differential interference contrast micrographs). 8,
9: Lateral views of unsqueezed specimens. Note that the orange cytoplasmic granules are too small to be recognized in the
micrographs but give the specimens a Very dark colour in.transmitted light (use well adjusted bright field illumination to ob-
serve the colourl). 10, 11: Squeezed specimen showing outer (collar) membranelles; extrusome girdle (marked with an aster-
isk in l0) composed of several bundles of needle-shaped, 15-20 pm long extrusomes; the lorica-like structure formed by
polygonal, cortical platelets; and sequestered plastids. AM = outer (collar) membranelles of adoral zone, E = extrusomes,
POP = polygonal cortical platelets, SC = sequestered plastids.
588

Oligotrichida
Pelagostrombidiwnfallax (äom MÜLLER 1996. 12, [3, in vivo; 14, vital staining with DAPI and viewed in the epifluorescence micro-
scope, UV excitation; 15-17, scanning electron micrographs). The cysts are not from the same population as studied by MÜLLER & GEL-
LER (1993), which is -+ P. mirabile (see there), but from a population isolated in spring 1996. Freshly collected specimens have, according
to H. MÜLLER (pers. comm.), a brown to reddish-brown colour, which tumed green in cultures, similar to that of their cryptomonad food.
The reddish-brown colour of P. fallax is, however, caused by minute cytoplasmic granules, that is, likely does not depend on food. Thus,
MÜLLER's population was possibly -+ P. mirabile. 12, 13, 15,17: Resting cysts with pre-formed emergence opening (arrow; cp. Fig. 16).
The cyst wall bears many fine spines (arrows in 17) between which bacteria and organic debris have accumulated. 14: The cyst surface is
colonized by many bacteria, which are recognized by their bright DAPI fluorescence. 16: Closed emergence opening of the cyst.
s89

Oligotrichida
Pelagostrombidium mirabile (IENARD, 1916) KRAINER, 1991
1916 Strombidium mirabile PENARD, M6m. Soc. Phys. Hist. nat. Genöve, 38:221 .
1922 Strombidium mirabile PENARD 1916 -PENARD, Et des Infusoires, p. 220 (redescription).
1932 Strombidium mirabile PENARD, 1916 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl,25:493 (first reviser).
1985 Strombidium mirabile PENARD,1916 - MAEDA & CAREY, Bull. Ocean Res. Inst. Univ. Tokyo, 19:
18.
l99l Pelagostrombidium mirabile (PENARD, 1916) - KRAINER, Europ. J. Protistol., 27: 64 (authoritative re-
description; combining author).
Taxonomy
See -+ Pelagostrombidiumfallax for generic classification and taxonomic problems.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 30-70 x 25-50 pm according to literature data, 40-50 x 35-40 pm (43 x 38 pm, n = 13) in the
Wallersee population we investigated.
2) Body at first glance ellipsoidal or obovoidal, that is, posteriorly nillrower than anteriorly (Fig. l, ll,l7, l9);
when viewed more accurately, however, amphoriform because collar bearing adoral membranelles distinctly
niurower than shoulder bearing extrusome girdle (Fig. 5,16,24,27); almost completely covered with,polygo-
nal cortical platelets 24 pm across, which are very transparent and thus difficult to recognize (cp. Fig. 1, 23);
plated portion often slightly detached in fixed specimens, forming lorica-like structure (Fig. 5, 13).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, globular to club-shaped. Micronucleus ellipsoidal (Fig. 4, 5,13,22).
4) Contractile vacuole possibly lacking. Neoformation organelle in posterior body half, composed of a globular
embryonic body and a long tube, which opens ventrally near the proximal end of the adoral zone of mem-
branelles (Fig. 5, 7-12,13, l5).
5) Cytoplasm yellowish-green because packed with yellow and green cleptoplasts (Fig. 1-4 and Fig. 4 on p. 4).
Extrusome girdle undemeath collar bearing adoral zone of membranelles interrupted at ventral opening of
buccal cavity; extrusomes serially arranged, needle-shaped, 14-18 ;rm long, form indistinct bundles with nu-
merous organelles each (Fig. 3, 5, 6, 19.21, 25).
6) Circumferential row closely underneath extrusome girdle, composed of unciliated basal bodies and thus not
recognizable in scanning electron micrographs, not intemrpted at buccal vertex (Fig. 5, 13, 15,25).
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of prominent adoral zone of membranelles on conspicu-
ous collar and inconspicuous undulating membrane on right wall of buccal cavity. Adoral zone of mem-
branelles bipartited in 14-15 outer (collar) and 12-17 inner (buccal) membranelles; collar membranelles form
open circle in frontal view; buccal membranelles discontinuous with outer ones and extending straight into
deep buccal cavity ending below mid-body (Fig. 1-5, 11, 14,16-20,22,26,27).Yentral opening of buccal
cavity terminates distinctly above mid-body (Fig. 3,15,19,24).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, swims very fast in short spirals.
Similar species
In vivo distinguished from the reddish-brown -+ Pelagostrombidium fallax by the yellowish or greenish colour
and smaller size (about 43 x38pm vs. 70x61pm). Differences in the infraciliature are inconspicuous and
mainly related to morphometrics, especially the number of inner (buccal) membranelles, which is slightly higher
(19-22) in -+ P. fallax than in -s P. mirabile (12-17). -+ Limnostrombidium spp. are in vivo easily distinguished
from Pelagostrombidium spp. by the buccal cavity. which is flat (short) in the former and deep (long) in the
590

Oligotrichida
latter. Accordingly, the buccal (inner) zone of membranelles of Limnostrombidium extends almost horizontally
(perpendicular to main body axis) near the anterior body end, whereas that of Pelagostrombidium extends me-
ridionally (parallel to main body axis) to near posterior body end. Comparison with further taxa -+ P. fallax. 5
(colour) andl arc key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: PENARD (1916, 1922) discovered P. mirabile in waters of Switzerland.
KRAINER (1991) found it in the pelagial of eutrophic groundwater ponds in Styria, Austria; it was very abun-
dant throughout the year with highest numbers in November , viz. 6200 ind. l-t and 61 .5 mg m-3 at 3 m. Further
records: eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria (Fig. 1-4, 19-21,23-27); rare in amesotrophic subal-
pine lake (Wallersee) near the city of Salzburg, Austria, in 40 m depth on June 16, 1997 (Fig. 16-18); surface
layer of Lake Consrance, Germany (MÜLLER & GELLER 1993, misidentified as -+ P. fallax; Fie. 15,22);
oligo-, meso- and polytrophic lakes, reservoirs, and ponds in the USSR (ALEKPEROY 1982,1983, 1984a, BE-
LOVA 1994, KRAVCHENKO 1969, LIYEPA 1984a, b, LOKOT 1987, OLEKSIV 1985); Ukrainian pond dur-
ing winter (KOVALCHUK & SVINTSOVA 1994); low salinity lagoons in the Caspian Sea (AGAMALIEV
1986); plankton of Danube River in Hungary (NOSEK & BERECZKY l98l); Moldau River near Prague, Czech
Republic (KALMUS 1928); various sites in the Conestoga drainage basin, Pennsylvania (CAIRNS 1965).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Probably feeds mainly on algae, as indicated by the cleptoplasts.
Biomass of 106 specimens about 10 mg (KRAINER 1991), 30 mg (our calculations), 50 mg (MÜLLER & GEL-
LER 1993), but 80 mg according ro NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK (1991), indicating misidentification. Ex-
perimentally determined maximum growth rates (r.; dt): 0.03 (0.01--0.05) at 5.5 oC and 0.90 (0.81 0.94) at
1o
21.5'C (MÜLLER & GELLER 1993; see also Table by -+ Urotrichafurcata). Possibly more common than in-
dicated by literature data because likely often not separated from other strombidiids, especially -+ P. fallax. So
far recorded only from Eurasia. The cleptoplasts indicate that it can sustain periods of low food supply.
ft 4
Nffi a,
Pelagostrombidium mirabik (l-4, slightly squeezed specimens of a population äom the pond at Salzburg University, Austria.). l-4: In
vivo ventral views at different focal planes showing macronucleus, sequestered plastids (globules), buccal vertex (arrowhead in 3), and
proximal end of adoral zone of membranelles (arrow in 2). E = extrusomes, IBC = inner margin of buccal cavity, IM = inner (buccal) mem-
branelles of adoral zone, MA = macronucleus, OBC = outer margin of buccal cavity.
59t

Oligotrichida
W'
&b
910
At4
CR
NO
MA
Pelagostrombidium mirabile (5-8, 13, 14, fiom KRAINER 1991; 9, 10, fiom KRAINER, redrawn fiom PENARD 1916; ll, 12, fiom PE-
NARD 1922; 15,*P.fallax" fromPETZ & FOISSNER 1992; 16-18, originals from a population collected in the Wallersee, a lake in Salz-
burg, Austria. 5, 6,9-12, in vivo; 7, 8, 13-15, protargol impregnation; 16-18, mercuric chloride fixation). 5, 11: Ventral views, 40 pm,
6G-70 pm. 6: Extrusome, lzt-18 pm. 7-10,12: Neoformation organelle during interphase (7,9, 10) and cell division (8, 12). 1!15: Ventral
(13, 15) and anterior polar ( 14) views of ciliary pattem, 40 pm, 35 pm. Figure 15 shows a middle divider having the oral anlage inside of the
neoformation organelle. 16-18: Ventral, oblique frontal, and frontal view ofsame specimen, showing body shape, buccal cavity, and promi-
nent adoral membranelles. AM = outer (collar) membranelles of adoral zone, CL = collar, CR = circumferential basal body row, E = extru-
somes, IM = inner (buccal) membranelles of adoral zone, L = lorica-like structure formed by cortical platelets, MA = macronucleus, NO =
neoformation organelle, POP = polygonal cortical platelets (cp. Fig. 23), UM = undulating membrane.
592



Oligotrichida
tral, dorsal, and frontoventral views showing amphoriform body and prominent adoral zone ofmembranelles, which is bipartited (arrows in
26) in an outer, almost circular portion and an inner straight part. The outer membranelles insert on a tube-like collar, while the inner ones
are attached to the left wall of the large buccal cavity. Arrowhead in (24) denotes the buccal vertex, which shifts backwards when the cell is
viewed obliquely (Fig.26), an optical effect, which must be taken into account in species identification. The unciliated circumferential basal
body row runs between the extrusome girdle and the cleft formed by the "lorica". AM = outer (collar) membranelles of adoral zone, E = ex-
trusome girdle, IM = inner (buccal) membranelles of adoral zone, L + CR = lorica cleft containing circumferential basal body row.
594

Oligotrich ida
Rimostrombidium armeniensis (znanrKov, 1e87) nov. comb.
1987 S tr o b ilidium arme ni ens is ZHARIKOV, Zool. Zh., 66:. 930.
Taxonomy
This species was overlookedbyPETZ & FOISSNER (1992), who transferred most Strobilidium species toRi-
mostrombidium becatse they have slightly spiralling somatic ciliary rows not extending to the posterior end of
the cell, that is, do not form a caudal spiral as h Strobilidium caudatum (Fig. 2 by --> Rimostrombidium velox).
Detailed redescription needed, especially of live specimens.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo (?) about 55-60 pm.
2) Body of silver nitrate-impregnated specimens roughly hemispherical with anterior end transversely truncated
and posterior broadly rounded (Fig. 1).
3) Macronucleus near anterior end of cell, globular (Fig. 1).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end, as in -+ R. lacustris.
5) Cytoplasm likely colourless.
6) About l2longitudinal bristle (ciliary) rows (Fig. l).
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of about 31 membranelles forming prominent, circular
adoral zone (Fig. l; details likely as in --> R. lacustris).
8) Movement likely rapid, probably as in --> R. lacustris.
Similar species
This species is unique by its globular macronucleus. In all other freshwater strobilidiids, the macronucleus is
semicircular and underneath the adoral zone of membranelles (see, for instance, Fig. 22 by --> R. lacustr"is and
Fig. 1 1-13 by -+ R. brachykinetum). Other oligotrichs have conspicuous extrusomes (--> Pelagostrombidium, -->
Limnostrombidium) or prominent jumping bristles (-->. Halteria, -+ Pelagohalteria). 1,3,1 (prominent adoral
zone of membranelles on anterior end) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: As yet known only from type location, that is, the pelagial of Lake Sevan, Arme-
nia (ZHARIKOV 1987).
Autecological data and ecological summary Food not known. Biomass of 106 specimens about 100 mg (our
calculations). Very likely rare and possibly sometimes mixed with other similar-sized Rimostrombidium species.
ffi
Rimostrombidium armeniensis (from ZHARIKOV 19Bl). 1: Oblique frontal view (60 pm)
CR- 2 of a silver nitrate-impregnated specimen showing adoral membranelles and bristle rows. 2:
The globular macronucleus is very unusual for a Rintostronthidium and is thus, if correctly
observed, the most important species character. AM = adoral zone of membranelles. CR =
bristle (ciliary) rows, CV = contractile vacuole.
s95

Oligotrichida
Rimostrombidium lacustris GorssNER, sKocsrAD & pRATT, 1988) pETZ & FoISSNER, 1992
1986 Strobilidium velox F.-FR. - SCHMITZ, Dissertation, p. 84 (misidentification).
1987 Strobilidium velox FAURE-FREMIET, 1924 - GRIM, J. Protozool. , 34: ll7 (scanning and transmission
electron microscopic study; misidentification).
1988 Strobilidium lacustris FOISSNER, SKOGSTAD & PRATT, J. Protozool ., 35: 493.
l99l strobilidium velox FAURE-FREMIET, 1924 - PACKROFF & WILBERT, Arch. Protistenk., 140 134
(misidentification; redescription).
1992 Rimostrombidium lacustris (FOISSNER, SKOGSTAD & PRATT, 1988) - PETZ & FOISSNER, J. Proto-
zool., 39: 160 (combining authors).
1995 Rimostrombidium lacustris (FOISSNER, SKOGSTAD & PRATT 1988) PETZ & FOISSNER 1992 -
KRAINER, Lauterbomia, 2l: 60 (redescription).
Taxonomy
See taxonomy of --> R. velox for generic classification and species identification. Previously, this species was not
separated from -+ R. velox, which is smaller (30-50 pm), has symbiotic algae and prominent cortical ridges. As
most workers used KAHL's key, several records of -+ R. veloxvery likely belong to R. lacustris, for instance,
those of PACKROFF & WILBERT (1991; Fig. 9) and SCHMITZ (1986), as well as those of GILBERT's group,
which we re-identified on request.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo abourt10_120 x 50-70 pm, according to SCHMITZ (1986) up to 150 x 110 pm.
2) Body obconical with anterior end transversely truncated and posterior conspicuously pointed (Fig. l, 3, 4,
10-15,25-27).
3) Macronucleus near anterior end of cell, almost circular. Micronucleus ellipsoidal (Fig. 1 , 2, 6, 19 , 22).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end, with two inconspicuous collecting canals (Fig. l, 2,4,10).
s) Cytoplasm colourless, without symbiotic algae (Caution: Rimostrombidium lacustris can be green due to in-
gested algae! Differentiation of zoochlorellae and food vacuoles with green algae: zoochlorellae are about
5 pm across and located singly in the cytoplasm, that is, are not enclosed in a vacuole like ingested algae).
6) 8-12, usually 10 longitudinal, slightly spiralling bristle (ciliary) rows along inconspicuous cortical ridges
hardly recognizable in live cells; commence underneath adoral zone of membranelles and end above contrac-
tile vacuole, that is, subterminally; bristles 2-3 pm long, narrowly spaced, usually attached to body surface
and partially covered by cortical ridge (Fig. 1,2,1-9,21,25-28,33).
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of 29-39, usually 31-35 membranelles forming promi-
nent, circular adoral zone; undulating membrane extends across peristomial bottom, inconspicuous because
cilia attached to peristomial bottom and obviously covered by a thin, cytoplasmic lobe (Fig. l, 5, 8, 11-20,
23, 24, 29-32; GRIM 1987).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, rotating on the spot and suddenly jumping away.
Similar species
-+ Rimostrombidium velox is smaller (30-65 pm), has symbiotic algae (differentiation from ingested green algae,
see character 5) and prominent cortical ridges. -+ Rimostrombidium humile, -+ R. brachykinetum, and R. saltans
(see Fig. 12 by -+ R. humile) are also distinctly smaller (<40 pm) than R. lacustris and have fewer (3 and 6), re-
spectively, more (14-16) cortical ridges. In Strobilidium caudatum, some bristle rows extend onto the posterior
pole forming a distinct spiral (see Fig.2by --> R. velox and FOISSNER et al. 1991, p. 153 for a detailed descrip-
596

Oligotrichida
tion). -+ Tintinnids have a lorica, the contractile vacuole near the anterior end of the cell, and an ellipsoidal mac-
ronucleus. Other oligotrichs also have an ellipsoidal macronucleus, a rounded posterior end, and conspicuous ex-
trusomes (-+ Pelagostrombidium, -+ Limnostrombidium) or jumping bristles (-+ Halteria, -+ Pelagohalteria). l,
2 (cell surface almost smooth, i.e. without conspicuous cortical ridges), 5 (no zoochlorellae), 6 (no bristle spiral
on posterior end), 7 (prominent adoral zone of membranelles on anterior end) are key characters for identifica-
tion.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in lakes. FOISSNER et al. (1988) discovered R. lacustris in May in
the mixolimnion of Lake Svinsj6en, a meromictic, eutrophic lake near Oslo (Norway), where the phytoplankton
was dominatedby Rhodomonas sp., several chrysophytes, and a small Cyclotella. GF.IINI (1987) isolated it from
a permanent large pond in northern Arizona, USA. PACKROFF & WILBERT (1991) found -R. lacustris in the
spring plankton of a eutrophic to polytrophic Eifel Maar lake, Germany, and KRAINER (1995) in groundwater
ponds of Styria, Austria. MÜLLER et al. (1991) estimated annual mean abundances of 110-160ind. l-'in
0-8 m and 60-86 ind. lr in 8-20 m in the meso- to eutrophic Lake Constance, Germany (see Ecogram a on p.
425). The SCHMITZ (1986) population occurred with low abundance (4 ind. l') in the August plankton of the
Rhine River. Records not substantiated by illustrations: small, meromictic lake in Upper Austria (NAUWERCK
1996); Ukrainian pond during winter (KOVALCHUK & SVINTSOVA 1994); periphyton of Tisa River in
Ukraine (KOVALCHUK 1997).
Autecologicat data: Feeds on algae, such as Cryptomonas and Rhodomonas (FOISSNER et al. 1988, MÜLLER
etal. 1997, WICKHAM etal. 1993). Biomass of 106 specimens about 90mg (95x60pm; our calgulations),
113 mg (MÜLLER & GELLER lgg3), 119 mg (SCHWEIZER 1994; mercuric chloride preserved cells). Experi-
mentally determined maximum growth rates (r.; d-r) according to MÜLLER & GELLER (1993): 0.43 (range
0.34-0.58) at 5.5 oC, 0.60 (0.54-0.67) at9 "C, O.1O (0.624.77) at 12"C,0.99 (0.95-1.04) at 15.5 'C, 1.38
(1.20-1.55) at 18.5 "C, 1.42 (1.32-1.60) at 2I.5 oC (see also Table by -+ Urotricha furcata). Addition of clay
(20 mg l-1 and 50 mg f ') to enclosures from Star Lake (USA) showed no significant effect on abundance (JACK
et al. 1993).
GILBERT (1994; see taxonomy) performed interesting experiments and calculations. On average, undisturbed
cells jumped 1.7-3.6 times per min and spent 0.8 Vo of their time jumping. Rimostrombidium lacustris jumped on
contact with the rotifer predator, Asplanchna girodi, travelling a mean distance of 1.5 mm (33 body lengths) with
a mean velocity of 7 mm s I (154 body lengths s-1) at 17 oC. The maximum velocity recorded during these escape
jumps was 16 mm s-r. For slow swimming (0.15 mm s-1') and rapid swimming during jumps (7 mm s-t), R. lacus-
lris would need about 0.07 Vo and 149 7o of its total metabolic rate, respectively. Jumping seemed to be an effec-
tive defence against rotifer predation. Only 3 Vo of 93 R. lacustris cells contacted by Asplanchna girodi were cap-
tured. However, it hardly escaped copepods to whose diet it contributed substantially (BURNS & GILBERT
1993, WICKHAM 1995a, WICHKAM & GILBERT 1993, WICKHAM et al.1993). WICKHAM (1995b) esti-
mated clearance rates ot R. lacustris of 6.2 and 1.2 ml per Cyclops abyssorum and h, and 0.8 and 1.6 ml per Cy-
clops kolensis and h, for treatments with and without alternative prey, respectively.
Ecological summary: Probably much more common than indicated by literature because obviously often not
separated from other strobilidiids, especially -+ R. velox, or not determined to species level. So far recorded
only from Eurasia. Being a euplanktonic algal feeder, abundance likely correlated with phytoplankton develop-
ment.
591

Oligotrichida
Rimostrombidium lacustris (1, 3-6, l'Tom FOISSNER et al. l9ltt't; 2, 7. lJ, ll'onr KRAINER 199-5; 9, liont PACKROFF &
WILBERT 1991. 1,5-8, protargol impregnation; 24,invivo;9, in vivo and after protargol impregnation). 1: Ventral view,
70 pm. 2, 9: Dorsal views, 53 pm, 71 pm. 3, 4: Freely motile specimens with fully opened oral apparatus. Specimen in (4)
shows contractile vacuole with inconspicuous collecting canals.5,8: Frontal view of oral apparatus,50pm,31pm. Arrow
in (5) marks distal end of adoral zone of membranelles, which forms an almost closed circle. The complicated fibre system,
which connects the individual membranelles, is shown in (8). 6: Transverse view showing slightly ribbed surface, semicircu-
lar macronucleus with large and small chromatin bodies, and ellipsoidal micronucleus usually attached to dorsal side of mac-
ronucleus. 7: Posterior polar view showing arrangement of ciliary rows, 31 pm. AM = adoral zone of membranelles, CR =
ciliary (= bristle) rows partially covered by cortical processes forming inconspicuous ridges, CV = contractile vacuole, CY =
cytopharynx, F = fibres, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, UM = undulating membrane.
598

Oligotrichida
Rimostronüidium lacustris (10-13, 16, 17, ll'om FOISSNER et al. l9ti8; 14, l-5, 18, origir.rals. l0-l-5, electronic tlash-
illuminated phase contrast micrographs; 16, 17, silver carbonate impregnation; 18, scanning electron micrograph). 10-14:
Specimens rotating on the spot, showing prominent adoral zone of membranelles and pointed posterior end containing the
contractile vacuole. Arrows mark food cells. 15: Frontal view of a rotating specimen. 16: Detail of ciliary rows, which con-
sist of closely spaced, 2-3pm long bristles. 17, 18: Frontal views of adoral zone of membranelles, which forms an almost
closed circle (cp. Fig. 5). Each membranelle is composed of three rows of ciliated basal bodies (cp. Fig. 32), except the
proximal one (arrow in l7; membranellar ring upside down, i.e. seen from inside of cell), which consists of two rows only.
Arrow in ( I 8) marks entrance to buccal cavity. AM = circular adoral zone of membranelles, CV = contractile vacuole in pos-
terior end.
s99

Oligotrichida
AM
'MA
üllt/lA
22
24
Rimostrombidium lacustris (19-24, originals fiom a population of the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria. 19, 2l-24, protargol
impregnation;20, scanning electron micrograph). 19: Frontoventral view showing ciliary rows, prominent adoral zone ofmembranelles, un-
dulating membrane (arrow) cxtending across flat peristomial bottom, and macronucleus. 20: Detail of adoral zone of membranelles and peri-
stomial bottom. Arrows mark pores at proximal end of adoral membranelles. 21: Posterior polar view showing I I ciliary rows. 22: The mac-
ronucleus is almost circular. 23,24zFrontal views oforal apparatus, that in (23) seen from inside ofcell. The circular adoral zone consists of
about32 membranelles and is, on the right side, accompanied by an inconspicuous undulating membrane extending across the peristomial
bottom. AM = circular adoral zone of membranelles, CR = ciliary (= bristle) row, CY = cytopharynx, FV = food vacuole, MA = macronu-
cleus, PB = peristomial bottom, UM = undulating membrane.
600

Oligotrichida
Rimostrombidium lacustris (original scanning electron micrographs ti'om a population of the eutrophic potld at Salzburg
University, Austria). 25: Slightly oblique ventral view showing prominent adoral zone of membranelles and somatic ciliary
(bristle) rows. 26, 272 Lateral views. Arrows in (26) mark meridional ciliary (bristle) rows. 28: Anterior end of two ciliary
(bristle) rows. Half of bristle length is covered by a cortical process forming an inconspicuous ridge, which is much less dis-
tinct than in -+ R. velox.The individual adoral membranelles are separated by distinct ridges (arrows). AM = circular adoral
zone of membranelles, CR = ciliary (= bristle) rows.
601

Oligotrichida
Rimostrombidium lacustris (original scanning electron n'riclographs fi'om a population oi'the eutrophic pond at Salzburg
University, Austria, and of the Höglwörther See in Bavaria).29r31: Frontal views showing prominent, circular adoral zone
of membranelles and entrance to buccal cavity (asterisk in 31). Note pores at proximal end of adoral membranelles. Half of
the peristomial bottom is covered by a lobe-like formation (delimited by arrowheads) produced by the cilia of the undulating
membrane. Both the cilia and the basal body row (arrows) from which they originate are obviously covered by some cyto-
plasmic material and thus invisible in live specimens. 30: Frontal view of a deciliated adoral zone of membranelles. Note
spiral arrangement of adoral membranelles and large buccal cavity (arrow). 32: Detail of adoral zone of membranelles. Each
membranelle is composed of three rows of basal bodies (cilia). AM = adoral membranelles, D = debris.
602

Oligotrich ida
'w
ffi
AM
r+f
I
36
Rimostrombidium lacustris (-13-37, origir-rals fiour a population ol'the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria, ancl
of the Höglwörther See in Bavaria. 33-35,37, scanning electron micrographs; 36, protargol impregnation). 33: Anterior end
of a ciliary (bristle) row. Half of bristle length is covered by a cortical process, which appears as inconspicuous ridge in the
light microscope. 34, 35, 37: Middle dividers showing the almost completed adoral zone of membranelles for the posterior
daughter. The zone develops in a subsurface pouch and then emerges in mid-body ofthe ventral side (arrow in 34). Note the
conspicuous pattern formed by the new adoral membranelles (37). 36: Middle divider showing the new oral apparatus
(AMN) for the posterior daughter. Note an ingested diatom (arrowhead) and the macronucleus underneath the adoral zone of
membranelles. AM = adoral zone of membranelles, CY = cytopharynx, MA = macronucleus.
603

Oligotrichida
Rimo strombidium v elox GAURE-FREMrEr, 1 e24) JANKowsKr, I e78
1924 Strobilidiumvelox FAURE-FREMIET, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg.,6: 56.
1932 Strobilidium velox FAURE-FR. , 1924 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 25:51 1 (first reviser; see taxonomy).
l9l8 Rimostrombidium gen. n. for Strobilidium velox F.=Fr. - JANKOWSKI, Tezisy Dokl. zool. Inst. Akad.
Nauk SSSR, year 1978:40 (combining author).
Taxonomy
LYNN & MONTAGNES (1988) considered the arrangement of the ciliary rows as an important generic criterion
in strobilidiids. Accordingly,PETZ & FOISSNER (1992) used the characteristic spiralling of the ciliary rows on
the posterior pole of Strobilidium as genus character (Fig. 2). Strobilidiids lacking such a caudal spiral were
transferred to Rimostrombidium JANKOWSKI, 1918, for which the (poor) original definition is "with ribbed
cortex".
KAHL (1932) used FAURE-FREMIET's drawing of R. velox, but did not mention the symbiotic algae, although
FAURE-FREMIET explicitly described and figured them. KAHL frequently found R. velox near Hamburg, how-
ever, his specimens were larger than those from the type population (50-70 pm vs. 30-50 pm) and had slightly
more bristle rows (10-12 vs. 8) and adoral membranelles (33-35 vs. 28-30). This indicates that KAHL confused
R.velox with -+ R. lacustris, which lacks symbiotic algae. As mostlaterworkers usedKAHL's key, severalre-
cords of R. yelox very likely belong to -+ R. lacustris, for instance, those of PACKROFF & WILBERT (1991;
Fig. 9 at -+ R. lacustis), SCHMITZ (1986), GILBERT (1994), and WICKHAM et al. (1993). The marine popu-
lation of ALEKPEROV & MAMAJEY A (1992) also lacks symbiotic algae.
Differential diagnosi
s
1) Size in vivo 30-50 x 53 pm, according to illustration, however, 65 pm long.
2) Body obconical with anterior end transversely truncated and posterior conspicuously pointed (Fig. 1).
3) Macronucleus near anterior end of cell, semicircular (Fig. 1).
4) Contractile vacuole not mentioned in original description, likely in posterior end, as in -+ R. lacustris.
5) Cytoplasm green due to symbiotic green algae (Fig. 1).
6) About 8 longitudinal, slightly spiralling bristle (ciliary) rows along prominent cortical ridges (Fig. 1).
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of 28-30 membranelles forming prominent, circular
adoral zone (Fig. 1; details likely as in -+ R. lacustris).
8) Movement rapid, probably as in -+ R.lacustis.
Similar species
-+ Rimostrombidium lacustris lacks symbiotic algae, is larger (usually 70-100 pm), and has slightly more (usu-
ally 10) but less conspicuous cortical ridges (bristle rows). -+ Rimostrombidium humile, -+ R. brachykinetum,
and -+ R. hyalinum are smaller (<40 pm) and have fewer bristle rows (3 and 6, respectively). In Strobilidium
caudatum (FROMENTEL, 1876), some bristle rows extend onto the posterior pole, forming a distinct spiral (Fig.
2; see FOISSNER et al. 1991, p. 153 for a detailed description). Other oligotrichs have a rounded posterior end
and conspicuous extrusomes (-+ Pelagostrombidium, -+ Limnostrombidium) or prominent jumping bristles (-»
Halteria, -s Pelagohalteria). 2 (about 8 prominent cortical ridges), 5, 7 (prominent adoral zone of membranelles
on anterior end) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Less common than indicated by literature because often not separated from -+ R. lacustris (-+ taxonomy)!
604

Oligotrichida
Occurrence and distribution: FAURE-FREMIET (1924) discovered R. velox in the plankton of French fresh-
water ponds. Later, it has been found frequently in lakes, reservoirs, ponds, and rivers, but, as explained above,
was very likely often confused with -+ R. lacustris: in June with very low abundance at 0.5-2 m and in the hypo-
limnion of an extremely productive pond (Priest Pot) in the English Lake District (FINLAY et al. 1988, GUHL
et al. 1994; symbiotic algae mentioned!); eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Bonn, Germany (WILBERT
1969);Lake Balaton (SEBESTYEN 1958; identification marked as uncertain); mesosaprobic reservoirs in Azer-
baijan (ALEKPEROV 1982);5 ind.l-r in the Kremenchug Reservoir, USSR, in autumn (NEBRAT 1975); l0
(May), 5 (June), 48 (July, August), 34 (September), and 6 (October) ind. lr in a betamesosaprobic reservoir in
the USSR (MAMAEVA 1916a); dominant at 0-8 m in a reservoir of the Moscow River supply system during
summer (BELOVA 1994), and in other reservoirs, lakes, and ponds of the USSR (ALEKPEROV 1980, 1984a,
ALEKPEROV & KRYUCHKOV 1982, ALIEV 1988, KRAVCHENKO 1969, LUK'JANOVIÖ 1973, MIRAB.
DULLAEV 1989, MORDUKHAJ-BOLTOVSKAJA 1965, MYLNIKOVA 1992a,b, OLEKSIV 1985, SMIRN-
OVA 1987, TROSHINA 1994, ZHARIKOV 1992, ZHUKOV & MAMAEVA 1918, -+ Ecogram on p. 310);
surface water of Lake Michigan, Lake Ontario, and Jacks Lake (CARRICK et al. 1991 , TAYLOR 1984, TAY-
LOR & HEYNEN 1987, TAYLOR & JOHANNSSON 1991, TAYLOR & LEAN l99l); small running waters in
Germany (HEUSS 1976); plankton of the Danube River in Slovakia and Hungary (MATIS & TIRJAKOVÄ
1994b, NOSEK & BERECZKY 1981); 25 (spring), 46 (summer), and 6 (autumn) ind. 1-r in the plankton of the
betamesosaprobic Volga River (MAMAYEVA 1975); .Tisa River, Ukraine (KOVALCHUK 1997). AGA-
MALIEV (1986) recorded R. velox from the benthal of low salinity lagoons of the Caspian Sea, and DOLAN
(1991) counted 10 000 ind. I I in mesohaline Chesapeake Bay waters, USA, in July.
Autecological data: Feeds on 2-5,pm sized algae (FINLAY et al. 1988). Biomass of 106 specimens according to
NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK (1991) 14 mg, according to SEBESTYEN (tgSS) 95 mg (identification
marked as uncertain), and about 50 mg when calculated from the original description. SCHLOTT-IDL (1984)
found R. velox in the epi- and metalimnion of a mesotrophic alpine lake (Piburger See) in Austria at 4-22.1 'C
(maximum abundance at 6.3'C),0-13.3 (12)mgl-rOz, pH 6.5-9.0 (7.4),0.012-0.350 (0.014)-g1-'NH4-N.
PATRICK etal. (1961) found it in the Savannah River (USA) at20-23 'C,5-<l0mglrCl,7-9mgl-r O:,
1--<5 mg lr BODs, <0.001 mg IrNH:-N,0.2-0.1mg lrNO:-N.
Ecological summary: Very likely rare and frequently mixed with -+ R. lacustris. Detailed redescription urgently
needed.
llimostrombidittm yelox ( I . lionr FAU RE-FREMIET 1924) and Strobilidium caudatum (2, liom FOISSNER ct al. l99l ). l: Lateral view in
vivo, length according to description 30-50 pm, according to illustration 65 pm. Note very prominent cortical ridges and symbiotic algae,
two important differences to -) R. lacustris. 2: Posterior polar view showing bristle spiral (arrowhead). AM = adoral zone ofmembranelles,
CR = cortical ridges near bristle (ciliary) rows, MA = semicircular macronucleus, SA = symbiotic algae.
605

Oligotrichida
Rimo strombidium brachykinetum KRAINER, tees
1995 Rimostrombidium brachykinetwm KRAINER, Lauterbornia, 2l: 62.
Nomenclature
KRAINER (1988) named this species Strobilidium hexakinetum in his unpublished thesis. Unfortunately, MA-
CEK et al. (1996) and §ttvtBt< et al. (1995,1996) used this name in their ecological papers.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 15-25 x 15-20 pm.
2) Body obconical to amphoriform with anterior end transversely truncated and posterior portion + distinctly ta-
pered; transverse polar view hexagonal due to distinct cortical ridges along ciliary rows (Fig. 1, 4,5, 13).
3) Macronucleus near anterior end of cell, semicircular to reniform. Micronucleus spherical (FiS. l,2,ll).
4) Contractile vacuole subterminal and protruding from body proper when maximally filled (Fig. 1, 3, 7).
s) Cytoplasm colourless, without symbiotic algae but often with greenish and orange-yellow food vacuoles.
6) Invariably 6 slightly spiral, equidistantly spaced, strongly shortened ciliary rows merely extending in mid-
body; each row composed of 2-3 pm long, fused bristles forming conspicuous lobe (Fig. l-6, 8, 10-13).
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of l8-19 membranelles forming prominent, circular
adoral zone; undulating membrane inconspicuous, extends across peristomial bottom (Fig. l-5, l3; details
probably as in -+ R. lacustris).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of rotation on the spot interrupted by zigzag jumps.
Similar species
-+ Rimostrombidium hyalinum is identical in size, shape, and number of bristle rows. However, the bristle rows
of -+ R. hyalinum are distinctly longer, that is, only slightly shortened anteriorly and posteriorly. This causes a
very different appea.rance in the scanning electron microsoope (cp. Fig. 5, 6 with Fig.4,6,7 by --> R. hyalinum),
where the bristle rows of R. brachykinetum appear lobe-like, although they are hardly broader than those of + R.
hyalinum; it is mainly the narrower length:width ratio, which makes the rows of R. brachykinetum so conspicu-
ous. -+ Rimostrombidium humile (distinct extrusomes after protargol impregnation) and R. conicum (Fig. l6 by
-+ R. humile) have only 3 bristle rows, whereas -+ R. velox (3V50 pm, with symbiotic algae) and -+ R. lacustris
(70-100;rm) have 9-12 bristle rows. -+ Halteriids have conspicuous jumping bristles. -+ Askenasia spp. are
ovoidal, that is, broadly rounded posteriorly. 1, 6 (six short, lobe-like bristle rows), 7 are key characters for iden-
tification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Locus classicus is the pelagial of a eutrophic groundwater pond in Styria, Austria
(KRAINER 1995). We found Rimostrombidium brachykinetum inthe pelagial of the eutrophic pond at Salzburg
University, Austria (Fig. 5-10). JÜRGENS et al. (1999) found it in a eutrophic, shallow lake in Jutland (SOby-
gardsg)during aScenedesmrzsbloominAugust(Fig. 11*13).MACEKetal. (1996) and§MBf etal.(1995,
1996) observed R. brachykinetum (as Strobilidium hexakinetum: see nomenclature) in the summer plankton of
the eutrophic Ä.imov Reservoir, Czech Republic, where it accounted for nearly 20 7o of total ciliate abundance,
but for only 10 7o of biomass.
606

Oligotrichida
Autecological data and ecological summary: Very likely more common than indicated by literature because
probably often not separated from other strobilidiids (especially -+ R. humile) or not determined to species level.
So far recorded only from Europe. Feeds on autotrophic flagellates (KRAINER 1995), bacteria, and cyanobacte-
ria. Grazing r Ia tes: 380 bacteria ind. h-r, 76 picocyanobacteria ind. h-r; clearance rates: 1 1 I nl ind. h-r for bacteria,
426 nl ind. h for picocyanobacteria; ingestion of algae >2 p^ about 3 (SIMEK et al. 1995, 1996). Biomass
"/o
of 106 specimens about 1.7 mg (MACEK et al. 1996) to 3 mg (own calculation). Growth rate 0.34+0.21 d-r
(mean + SD; MACEK et al. 1996).
biomasg, organic carbon g t- t
50 1 00%
80% -.- total biomass
ffi Strobitidium hexakinetum
60% f Hdbria grandinella
m
scuticociliates
Fm
40% Cinetochilum margaritaceum
E= Cyrtolophosls mucicola
20% ffi coleps sp.
N
Urotricha furcata
&, Urotricha ristoi
00%
scarce & unidentified
tl 20 ß2527 § 1 3 6 I 10 13 1517 22 cillates
August 1993 September
Ecogram (fiom MACEK e1 al. 1996). Seasonal changes in the epilin.ureiic total ciliate biornass (g organic carbon l-r) and
relative contribution of ciliate raxa(Vo) to biomass in Ä.imov Reservoir (Czech Republic) during the summer phytoplankton
peak. Stt"ohilidium hexakinetum = Rimostrombidium brachykinetum (see nomenclature).
CR
oP--
%_
7a
e
-_E
\s
Rimostrombidium brachykinetum (l'rom KRAINER 1995. l, ir.r vivo; 2 4, protargol impregnation). l-3: Somatic and oral
ciliary pattern and general cell organization, 15-25 pm, 20 pm,24 pm. 4: Anterior polar view showing circular adoral zone
of membranelles, undulating membrane, and distinct cortical ribs (ciliary rows) producing hexagonal cell outline. AM = ado-
ral zone of membranelles, CR = ciliary (= bristle) rows numbered from 1-6, CV = contractile vacuole, CY = cytopharynx,
MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, OP = oral primordium, UM = undulating membrane, l-6 = ciliary (= bristle) rows.
607

Oligotrichida
AM
12
Rintostronüidiumbrachykineturr(-5-l0,originals; ll-l3,originalsll'onislideskindlysuppliedbyK.JURGL,NS,Plön.-5,6,scanningelec-
tron micrographs; 7-13, protargol impregnation).5,6: Lateral view and detail showing adoral zone and short (species name!), lobe-like bris-
tle (ciliary) rows. 7-10: An early divider at four focal planes showing the six rather short bristle rows (only two marked by arrows), the mac-
ronucleus, the cytopharynx (arrowhead in 9), the contractile vacuole (asterisk in 7), and the undulating membrane (arrowhead in 7) in the
newly forming oral apparatus. 11, 12: Same spepimen at different focal planes showing macronucleus, micronucleus (arrowhead), and six
bristle rows (arrowheads). 13: Optical longitudinal section of an amphoriform specimen. Note short bristle rows (arrowheads). AM = circu-
lar adoral zone of membranelles. MA = macronucleus.
608

Oligotrichida
Rimo s tro mbidium hy alinum (MTRABDULLAEV, tsss) pErz & FoIS sNER, I ee2
1985 Str obilidium hy alinurz MIRABDULLAEV, Zool. Zh., 64: 1892.
1992 Rimostrombidium hyalinum (MIRABDULLAEV, 1985) - PETZ & FOISSNER, J. Protozool., 39: 160
(combining authors).
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo22-35 x\t6-ZZ pm.
2) Body obconical to cylindroidal with anterior end transversely truncated and posterior portion + distinctly ta-
pered; transverse polar view + circular (Fig. 1, 4,6,1).
3) Macronucleus near anterior end of cell, semicircular (Fig. l).
4) Contractile vacuole not known.
s) Cytoplasm colourless, without symbiotic algae.
6) Invariably 6 slightly spiral, equidistantly spaced ciliary rows of almost body length (Fig. 1-7), each com-
posed of minute, fused bristles (Fig. 8, 9).
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of about 20-22 (MIRABDULLAEV 1985 and as esti-
mation from scanning electron micrographs) membranelles forming prominent, circular adoral zone; undulat-
ing membrane likely as in congeners (Fig. l,3J; details probably as in -+ R. lacustris).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, periods of rotation on the spot interrupted by zigzag jtmps.
Similar species
-+ Rimostrombidium brachykinetum is identical in size, shape, and number of bristle rows. However, the rows of
this species are distinctly shorter, merely extending in mid-body. This causes a very different appearance in the
scanning electron microscope (cp. Fig. 4, 6, 1 with Fig. 5, 6 by --> R. brachykinetum), where the rows of -+ R.
brachykinetum appear lobe-like, although they are hardly broader than those of R. hyalinum; it is mainly the nar-
rower length:width ratio, which makes the rows of -+ R. brachykineturn so lobe-like. -s Rimostrombidium hu-
mile (distinct extrusomes after protargol impregnation) and R. conicum (Fig. 16 by -+ R. humile) have only 3
bristle rows, whereas -> R. yelox (30--50 pm, with symbiotic algae) and -s R. lacustris (70-100 trrm) have 9-12
bristle rows. -+ Halteriids have conspicuous jumping bristles. -+ Askenasia spp. are ovoidal, that is, broadly
rounded posteriorly. 1, 6 (six long, flat bristle rows). 7 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Locus classicus is a piscicultural pond in the Tashkent Region, Uzbekistan
(MIRABDULLAEV 1985; see also MIRABDULLAEV 1988, 1989). We found Rimostrombidium hyalinum in
the pelagial of a eutrophic lake (Grabensee) near Salzburg, Austria (Fig. a-9).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Very likely more common than indicated by literature because
probahly often not separated from other strobilidiids (especially -+ R. brachykinetum and -+ R. humile) or not de-
termined to species level. So far recorded only from Europe and Asia.
Food not known, but likely as in other small congeners, that is, bacteria,
AM-
cyanobacteia, autotrophic flagellates. Biomass of 106 cells about 5 mg.
,wry
MA
Rimostrombidium hyalinum (from MIRABDULLAEV 1985). 1: Ventral view in vivo,,
CR
20 prm. 2r 3: Lateral and frontoventral view after silver impregnation. AM = adoral zone of
membranelles, CR = bristle rows, MA = macronucleus, SS = silverline system.
609

Oligotrichida
Rimostrombidium hyalinum (4-9, original scanning electron rnicroglaphs fiom a population collected in a lake [Grabensee] near Salzburg,
Austria). 4,6:Lateral views showing the prominent adoral zone of membranelles and the six ciliary rows (asterisks), which are distinctly
longer and flatter than those of -+ Rlz ostrombidium brachykinetum. This causes a very different appearance especially in the scanning elec-
tron microscope (cp. Fig. 5, 6 by -+ R. brachykinetum), where the ciliary rows of -+ R. brachykinetum apper lobe-like (due to the narrow
length : width ratio), although they are hardly broader than those of R. hyalinum.5, 7: Anterior polar views showing the prominent adoral
zone of membranelles, which occupies the anterior end of the cell. 8, 9: Details of ciliary rows showing that the bristles are short (about
2 pm), stiff cilia distally connected by fibrous material (arrows). AM = cirbular adoral zone of membranelles.
610

Oligotrichida
Rim o s tr o mb idium h umile (pENARD, 1 922) pErz & FoIS sNER, t ss2
1922 Su"obilidium humile PENARD, Etudes Infusoires, p.218.
1932 Strobilidium humile PENARD, 1922 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 25: 5 12 (first reviser).
1986 Strobilidium humile PENARD, 1922- MAEDA, Bull. Ocean Res.Inst., Univ. Tokyo,2l:41(revision).
1991 Strobilidium humile PENARD, 1922 - FOISSNER, BLATTERER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informa-
tionsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll9l: 159 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic
and ecological monograph).
1992 Rimostrombidium humile (PENARD, 1922) - PETZ & FOISSNER, J. Protozool., 39: 160 (combining
authors).
1995 Rimostrombidium humile (PENARD 1922) PETZ & FOISSNER 1992 - KRAINER, Lauterbornia,2l: 58
(authoritative redescription).
Taxonomy
Possibly, Rimostrombidium conicum (KAHL, 1932) PETZ & FOISSNER, 1992 (Fig. 16) from a brackish pond
near the Elbe estuary is a junior synonym of R. humile (detailed redescription needed).
Dillerential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo 12-38 x 15 pm, usually 20-25 pm long.
2) Body obconical, becomes globular under cover-glass pressure or when temperature increases; transverse polar
view + circular (Fig. 1-6, 9,13,11,26,21).
3) Macronucleus near anterior end of cell, elongate reniform to semicircular. Micronucleus ellipsoidal (Fig. 1, 2, 5,
t4, fi,23).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior third, protruding from body proper when maximally filled (Fig. 1, 5,6, 13,21).
5) Cytoplasm colourless, without symbiotic algae. Conspicuous rods along ciliary rows after protargol impregna-
tion, likely some kind of extrusomes difficult to recognize in live specimens (Fig. 2, 11-21,23).
6) Invariably 3 ventrolateral, slightly spiral and moderately shortened ciliary rows, each composed of 2-3 pm
long, narrowly spaced bristles (Fig. 1, 2,4, 15, l1 , 18,23-25,28,30,32).
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of 19-22 membranelles forming prominent, circular ado-
ral zone; undulating membrane inconspicuous, extends across peristomial bottom (Fig. 1, 2, 4, 14, 19, 22, 24,
27,28; details probably as in -+ R. lacustris).
8) Movement conspicuous, that is, rotating very fast and straight ahead (PENARD); according to KAHL, slowly
rotating on the spot and suddenly jumping away.
Similar species
-+ Rimostrombidium brachykinetum and --> R. hyalinum have 6 bristle rows, R. saltans (Fig. l2) has 14-16 lon-
gitudinal ridges. In protargol preparations easily identified by the conspicuous rods along the ciliary rows, which
are very likely lacking in the other species mentioned (+ R. brachykinetum). --) Rimostrombidium velox
(30-50 pm, with symbiotic algae and prominent cortical ridges) and -> R. lacustris (10-120 pm) have 8-12 bris-
tle rows around the perimeter of the cell. In running waters, R. humile should not be confused with Tintinnidium
semiciliatum (STERKI, 1879) KENT, l88l (macronucleus ellipsoidal near mid-body, contractile vacuole near
anterior end), which has a similar size (30-50 pm) and shape when it has left the lorica (detailed description, see
FOISSNER et al. 1991, p. 112). Other oligotrichs are larger Q50 pm; + Limnostrombidium, --> Pelago-
strombidium) or have jumping bristles (-+ halteriids). l, 5 (extrusomes), 6, 7 (prominent adoral zone of mem-
branelles on anterior end) are key characters for identification.
611

Oligotrichida
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in the pelagial of small and large water bodies. occasionally in running
waters (KAHL 1932, VUXANOVICI 1962, RECK 1987). PENARD (1922), however, discovered R. humile inthe
detritus of a pond near Geneva (Switzerland). Accordingly, BICK (1912a) classified it as facultative plankter.
KRAINER (1988, 1995; Fig. 1-4, 11-19) found up to 1156 ind. l-r in eutrophic groundwater ponds in Styria, Aus-
tria, from October to May, and H. MÜLLER (Fig. 20-22) observed it in the pelagial of Lake Constance, Germany.
We found R. humile in the pelagial of the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria, and in the Höglwörther
See in Bavaria (Fig. l3-15, 23-32). Records not substantiated by morphological data: small, meromictic lake in
Upper Austria (NAUWERCK 1996); Erlaufsee, Austria (SAMPL 1967); 50000 ind. I I in the Poppelsdorfer Wei-
her, a eutrophic pond in Germany during April (WILBERT 1969); with up to 3281ind. l-r in a lake (Plußsee) in
Germany between August and September (RECK 1987; -+ Ecogram); lakes in Florida comprising all trophic lev-
I)
els, with annual means (cells I of 678 in oligotrophic-acidic, 2830 in oligotrophic-nonacidic, 5894 in meso-
trophic, 13 985 in eutrophic, and 26 800 in hypereutrophic lakes (BEAVER & CRISMAN 1989a, 1990, BEAVER
et al. 1988, HAVENS & BEAVER 1997); eutrophic site from Lake Huron (LAVRENTYEV et al. 1995).
Also recorded from running waters: plankton of a side arm of the Danube River in Hungary NOSEK & BERE-
CZKY 1981); all over the year with low to high numbers in the plankton of two lowland brooks in Germany
(HEUSS 1976); 1000 ind. II in a Tennessee river (LACKEY 1942). BARTSCH & HARTWIG (1984) found R.
humile sporadically in the sediment of the Hamburg harbour, and MADONI & GHETTI (1981) occasionally in a
rotating biological contactor.
Autecological data: Feeds on small (e.g. Cyclotella) and long (body sized) pennate diatoms. Biomass of 106
specimens about 4 mg (FoISSNER et al. 1991, NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991) to 7 mg (SCHWEI-
ZER 1994; mercuric chloride preserved cells). BICK (1912a) fotnd Rimostombidium humile in eutrophic ponds
and in peptone decomposition experiments under the following conditions: pH7.6-8.1,1-8.7 mgl-rOz,
0-5.9 mg 1-r NH+*-N. RECK (1987), who found it in a small lake (see above), provided the following autecologi-
cal data (-+ Ecogram):14.7-20.2 "C (more than 1000ind.l-r at 14.8-16.4 "C), pH8.4-9.3 (8.4-8.8),6.5 to
I
1 1.5 mg I Oz (9.9-10.3), 66 to
126 7o Oz-saturation (91-102),
0.02-0.05 mg I 1 NH+*-N (0.02 ro
Tlele 0.03).
(r)
I Ecological summary: Recorded
J from Eurasia only. Common in
§ lake plankton, occasionally also
5
I benthic and in rivers; high abun-
l0 r)
7 dances (> 10 000 ind. I under
0
eutrophic and hypertrophic condi-
9
tions. Saprobic classification ac-
a cording . to FOISSNER et al.
O (1991): betamesosaprobic (o = 2,
a
o b - 2,I - 4, SI = 1.8).
o
-21
2J Ecogram (from RECK l9B7). Temporal
and spatial distribution of Rintostrombid-
25
ium humile, (Jrosonta c'ienkow,s/cii (a hy-
uo
U. cienkowskii lnd.y' x=ver. (B (=12 @ ro-os @ S r24o-2s40 potrichous ciliate), and Botticula ringue-
B. ringuelotl lnd./l x =ver. o 5-16 (r 20-45 I ss-rrs I zol leti (a freshwater folliculinid) in the oxy-
gen profile of a eutrophic lake (Plußsee) in
S. humile lnd.y' ee0 @ zto-uo @ soo-16pd{D 32ss Germany.
6t2

Oligotrichida
?
rlO-
t-
l-
'l=I-'
it_\
: l^r'
"aa.
''. lq-
'.1-,-
l'-.
&
7
W
W
I
Rintostrombidiurn humile (l-4, i'om KRAINER 1988, 1995; 5-7, tiom PENARD 1922;8, after PENARD 1922 lrom KAHL 19-32; 9-l l,
from VUXANOYICI 1962; 13-15; originals from pond at Salzburg University. 1, 5-1 1, 13-15, in vivo; 2-4, protargol impregnation). 1, 5,
6, 8-1.1.: General views, 20*27 Stm. 2,3: Yentral view of ciliary pattem and intemal organization, 32 pm. 4: Frontal view showing the three
ciliary (bristle) rows and the complicated fibre system connecting the individual membranelles. Arrow marks undulating membrane (see Fig.
3 1 by -+ R. lacustris for detailed description). 7: Frontal view of adoral zone. 13-15: Slightly squeezed specimens showing main organelles.
Arrow in (13) marks small protrusion on peristomial field. AM = adoral zone of membranelles, C = cilia, CR = ciliary (= bristle) rows, CV =
contractile vacuole, CY = cytopharynx, E = exfiusomes, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, OP = oral primordium.
Rimostrombidiuru saltans (12, from VUXANOVICI 1962;28 pm) and R. conicum (16, from KAHL 1932;50 pm) in vivo.
6t3

Oligotrichida
o
2,
23 24
Rimostrombidium humile \17 22,from FOISSNER et al. l99l [7-19, population tiom a groundwater pond in Styria, slide kindly supplied
by H. KRAINER);20-22, populatiirn from Lake Constance, slide kindly supplied by H. MÜLLER 23,24, originals from pond at Salzburg
University. 17-24, protargol impregnation). 17, 18: Representative specimen at two focal planes showing ciliary rows, extrusomes, macro-
nucleus, and oral primordium. 19-21: Lateral views showing heavily impregnated extrusomes. Note that body shape may become globular
due to the preparation (2O,21). 22t Frontal view showing circular adoral zone of membranelles. 23, 24: Yentral and dorsal view of same
specimen showing the specific three ciliary rows. AM = adoral zone of m'embranelles, CR1-3 and 1-3 = ciliary (= bristle) rows, CV = con-
tractile vacuole, E = extrusomes, MA = macronucleus, OP = anlage of daughter's oral apparatus, UM = undulating membrane.
6t4

Oligotrichida
äffi
AV ffiffi
Rimostrombidium hwnile (original scanning electron micrographs trorn a population ol the eutrophic pond at Salzburg Uni-
versity, Austria, and the Höglwörther See in Bavaria). This species belongs to a group of very small rimostrombidids com-
prising Rimostrombidium humile, -+ R. hrachykinetum, and -+ R. hyalinum. All have a similar size and shape but differ in
the number, arrangement and length of the somatic ciliary (bristle) rows. 25: Ventrolateral view showing the three bristle
rows composed of 2-3 pm long, stiff cilia (bristles). 26: Unciliated dorsolateral region.27: Anterior polar view of a speci-
men with about 17 large adoral membranelles forming a prominent, circular zone. The arrow marks the proximal end of the
adoral zone, respectively, the entrance to the buccal cavity. 28: Lateral view showing one bristle row (arrowhead). AM =
adoral zone of membranelles, l-3 = bristle (= ciliary) rows.
615

Oligotrichida
ffi$
Rimostrombidium humile (original scanning electlon micrographs tiom a population of the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria,
and the Höglwörther See in Bavaria). 29, 31: Middle dividers. The oral apparatus for the posterior daughter originates in a deep pouch of the
unciliated dorsolateral region. Later, the cavity evaginates transferring the new oral apparatus onto the cell surface. Thus, the new oral appa-
ratus becomes arranged in a right angle to the old one: this type ofmorphogenesis is called enantiotropic. The arrowhead in (31) denotes the
cilia of the new adoral membranelles, which protrude from the pouch. 30, 32: Anterior and posterior end of a bristle row composed of
2-3 prm long, stiff cilia, which often bear a thin process (arrow in 32) or are connected via a thin fibre of unknown function (anow in 30).
AM = adoral zone of membranelles, 2, 3 = bristle (ciliary) rows.
616

Oligotrichida
Codonella cratera GErDy, r877) rMHoF, 1885
1877 Dffiugia cratera LEIDY, Proc. Acad. nat. Sci. Philad., year 1877 : 307 (without illustration).
1879 Dffiugia cratera LEIDY - LEIDY, Rep. U. S. geol. Surv., 12: 108 (first illustrations).
1885 Codonella cratera (LEIDY ?) - IMHOF, Zool. Anz.,8: 293 (combining author).
1885 Codonella lacustris ENTZ, Mitt. zool. Stn Neapel, 6: 196 (detailed description from life; synonym).
l9O9 Codonella lacustis (ENTZ sen.) - ENTZ, Math. naturwiss. Ber. Ung., 25: 207 (detailed redescription
from life).
1924 Tintinnopsis lacustris ENTZ sen. forma lnvis - FAURE-FREMIET, Bull. biot. Fr. Belg., 6: 88 (detailed
redescription from life).
1929 Codonella uatera (LEIDY) VORCE - KOFOID & CAMPBELL, Univ. Calif. Publs Zool.,34:58 (revi-
sion).
1932 Codonella (Dffiugia 18'71 - Tintinnus 1879) cratera (LEIDY, 1811) - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl.,25: 517 (re-
vision).
1919 Codonella cratera (LEIDY, 1877) - FOISSNER & WILBERT, J. Protozool.,26: 97 (authoritative rede-
scription from life and after silver impregnation).
l98l Codonella cratera (LEIDY, 1877) - BERNATZKY, FOISSNER & SCHUBERT, Zool. Scr., 10: 82 (mor-
phology and morphometry of lorica).
l99l Codonella uatera (LEIDY, 1877) IMHOF, 1885 - FOISSNER, BLATTERER, BERGER & KOH-
MANN, Informationsber. Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, U9l: 183 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is,
taxonomic and ecological monograph).
1993 Codonella oatera (LEIDY, 1877) IMHOF, 1885 - PETZ & FOISSNER, Europ. J. Protistol., 29: ll4
(morphogenesis).
I
Nomenclature and taxonomy
Codonella oatera is well-known due to the detailed redescription by FOISSNER & WILBERT (1979). Origi-
nally, it was classified as a testate amoeba (LEIDY 1811 , l8l9) and later split into many varieties and forms
(cHrANG 1956, DADAY t892, ENTZ 1885, 1909b, GAJEWSKAJA t933, HADA 1939, rMHOF 1886, KAHL
1932, KOFOID & CAMPBELL 1929, MOROZOVSKAYA & POLISHCHUK 1969, NIE 1933, ZACHARIAS
1905). These and other varieties and species are distinguished by minute differences in shape, size, colour, and
composition (xenosomes) of the lorica; however, such characters are highly dependent on season (e.g., spring
loricae are larger) and habitat (Fig. 16-35; BERNATZKY et al. 1981, ENTZ 1909b, PEJLER 1962). Sometimes,
the spiral collar is only recognizable at the inside of the lorica (Fig. 19, 2O), and in young specimens it is lacking
or consists of one or two turns only (Fig. 30, 31). ENTZ (1909b) found very hyaline loricae (Tintinnopsis lacus-
tris forma reticulata and forma laevis) which consisted of a pentagonally or hexagonally meshed substance with
only few agglutinated xenosomes. Since all these taxa have not yet been confirmed by silver impregnation, we
consider them as species indeterminata or synonyms of C. cratera. Tintinidiopsis lacustris EUTZ in CZERNIN-
CHUDENITZ (1958, p. 189) is an incorrect subsequent spelling.
Di f,ferent ial diagnosis
1) Body size in vivo about 70 x 25 pm, including the stalk-like cytoplasmic process anchoring cell to lorica.
2) Body cylindrical with posterior portion stalk-like elongated and anchored to lorica bottom (Fig. 1, 2,8, l7a,
b). Cell retracts into or leaves lorica when disturbed (Fig. 36,31).
3) Two ellipsoidal or reniform macronuclear nodules in mid-body, each with one micronucleus (Fig. 1,2, l2).
4) Contractile vacuole near anterior end ofcell (Fig. l).
5) Cytoplasm colourless, however, cells often colourful due to ingested algae.
617
/

Oligotrichida
6) 29-32 slightly spirally extending ciliary rows on cylindrical body portion: left of midline 6 (rows 21-32 in
Fig. 3), right of midline l0 rows (rows 1-10 in Fig. 3) with widely spaced, single basal bodies bearing l0 prm
long cilia and a basal body pair at the anterior end having two 15-20 pm long cilia; row I (= ventral row) al-
most as long as body, consistsof basal body pairs with 15-20pm long cilia emerging from posterior basal
body. On left side a dense field of about 1 6 ciliary rows (rows 1 l-26 in Fig. 3) composed of narrowly spaced,
single basal bodies bearing l0 pm long cilia; underneath a ventrolateral row with single, ciliated basal bodies
(Fig. l, 2,12-15). Details of ciliary pattern, see Figure 3.
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of 15 membranelles forming prominent, circular adoral
zone; undulating membrane inconspicuous because deep in buccal cavity (Fig. 1-3, 8, 13, 36-38).
8) Continuously swimming, that is, not jumping and rotating like other oligotrichs.
e) Lorica 43*63 x 3l-49 pm (mean = 52 x 37 |rm, n = 52, five populations studied by BERNATZKY et aL.
1981); according to LEIDY (1879) 56*72 x 3642pm, collar 28-36trrm long; orher aurhors (e.g.
FAURE-FREMIET 1924) provided similar sizes, that is, lengths between 40 and 80 pm. Lorica firm and sta-
ble, does not collapse when air-dried, shape rather variable (Fig. 16-31), usually broadly amphoriform, that
is, posterior half (bowl) spherical to broadly conical and anterior half (collar) cylindrical or helical with
3.54.5 turns in adult specimens (caution: turns of the collar sometimes difficult to recognize from outside);
consists of a firm membranous substance to which many xenosomes agglutinate (irregularly shaped mineral
particles, diatoms, etc.; depends on season and habitat, see taxonomy and BERNATZKY et al. 1981; Fig. 1,
2,5-tt, t6-39).
Similar species
Codonella craterais easily identified in vivo and in protargol preparations due to its characteristically shaped
lorica, the two macronuclear nodules, and the unique ciliary pattern. Stenosemella lacustris FOISSNER &
O'DONOGHUE, 1990 has a heart-shaped lorica and is possibly confined to Australia (see Figures below). 3 and
9 are key characters for identification.
Stenosemella lacustris (scannir-rg electron microgritphs ll'orn FOISSNER BL O'DONOGHUE I 990). Lateral views ol' lorica, 40-48 x
42-50 pm.
618

Oligotrichida
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Very common in lakes, ponds and reservoirs, usually peaking in spring; never re-
corded from ephemeral water bodies and terrestrial habitats. Locus classicus is Bristol in Pennsylvania, USA,
where LEIDY (1877, 1819) discovered C. cratera in a canal among Ceratophyllum and other aquatic plants in
August. FOISSNER & WILBERT (1919) and we (Fig. 36-39) found rich populations in mesotrophic lakes near
Salzburg, Austria. Further records: small, meromictic lake in Upper Austria (NAUWERCK 1996); mesotrophic
lake (Mondsee) in Austria (SALBRECHTER & ARNDT 1994); oligosaprobic reservoirs in Czechoslovakia
(sLÄDEÖEK & sLÄDEÖKIYA 1962, sLÄDEÖKovÄ a sr-Ä»EÖEK 1960); with a slight peak below 20 m
in a Czech reservoir after the autumn overtum (MACEK 1994); lake (Obersee) in Estonia (SCHNEIDER 1909);
16800 ind. lr in a reservoir and 5200 ind. Ir in a pond in England (GOULDER 1915,1916); sedimentation pond
of peat production in Finland (SELIN & KOSKINEN 1988); 38 (0 m), 10 (4 m), and 5 (7 m) ind. I I in a Finnish
lake (JARNEFELT 1934a b); French lakes (VIRIEUX 1916); spring peaks in meso- and eutrophic lakes in Ger-
many (APSTEIN 1893, ARNDT etal.1993, MATHES & ARNDT 1994,1995, ZACHARIAS 1893);rhroughour
the year, with highest abundances (1300-1600 ind. I r) during spring, in a eutrophic lake (Belauer See) in Ger-
many (ZIMMERMANN 1994); in spring and in November with low abundance (17 ind. l-r) in a eutrophic lake
(Plußsee) in Germany (RECK 1987; see Ecogram by --> Tintinnopsis cylindrata and Table); slightly eutrophic
reservoir in Germany with a peak in May (BEUSCHOLD 1961); ponds in Hungary (KREPUSKA 1930); 8
ind. cm-2 in the sediment water-interface of a reservoir in Italy in January (MADONI 1989); 100 (l m), 140 (5
m), 340 ( l0 m), 280 (20 m), and 20 (28 m) ind. I'r in the October plankton of a Norwegian lake (BRAARUD et
al. 1929); in the winter plankton of a Polish(?) lake (LAKOWITZ 1901); up to 100 ind. 1-r in a reservoir in Portu-
gal from September to November (VASCONCELOS 1990); lakes in Central Sweden and in the sub-Arctic
(PEJLER 1962); q to 12000 ind.lr in Swiss lakes of various trophic states (AMBERG 1903, BRUTSCHY
1922, BÜRGI et al. 1985, ODERMATT 1970); in spring up to 100 ind. I'r in the epilimnion and metalirnnion of a
karstic lake in Yugoslavia (PRIMC 1986); rare in Lake Kinneret, Israel, a warrn monomictic lake with tempera-
tures ranging from 15 to29"C and a chloride content of 250 mglr (MADONI 1990); common in Lake Baikal
(GAJEWSKAJA 1933, ROSSOLIMO 1923) and in many other ponds, lakes, and reservoirs of all trophic states
in the USSR (e.g. ALKEPEROV 1983,1984a, KRAVCHENKO 1969, LAVRENTYEV 1989, LUK'JANOVIÖ
1973, MAMAEVA 1976, MORDUKHAJ-BOLTOVSKAJA 1965, MYLNIKOVA 1992a, NEBRAT 1980,
OLEKSIV 1985, SHCHERBAKOV 1969, SMIRNOVA 1987, ZYKOFF 1904, 1905); Ceylon (DADAY 1898);
pond and Lake Biwa in Japan (HATANO & WATANABE 1981, MORI 1970); rare in Lake Michigan during
summer and in other lakes in the USA (EDDY 1927, HERRMANN 1977); throughout the year, with a peak in
May (105 ind. l-rat surfcae; lll2ind.l-r at 15 m;61'7 ind.l-r at 3l m;498 ind.l-r at 92m), in the oligotrophic Ca-
yuga Lake in the USA (HUNT & CHEIN 1983); eutrophic Lake Oglethorpe (USA) with 960 mm3 m-2 (up to
3120 ind.l't in 2 m) during winter mixis, declining to low densities after April (PACE 1982, PACE & ORCUTT
1982, SANDERS et al. 1989); Lake Erie, USA (STEHLE 1923); lake in Canada (BIGELOW 1928); Argentina
(SECKT 1924); dominant in the eutrophic Rio Grande Reservoir, Brazil (BARBIERI & GODINHO ORLANDI
1989a). Lorica occurs also in fossil lake sediments and can thus be used for paleolimnological investigations
(FREY 1964, SCHÖNBORN 1990).
Codonella uatera occurs, according to HALME (1958), BIERNACKA (1956) and VERSCHAFFELT (1930),
also in oligohaline brackish water; however, salt tolerance is low (-+ Ecogram). SCHULZ (1965) recorded only
empty loricae from the oligohaline area of the Elbe River, Germany. GESSNER (1937) found C. cratera at2.4
7oo salt in freshened lagoons of Rügen island, Germany, and SOUTO (1973, 1914) recorded it from an estuary in
Argentina.
Codonella cratera occurs also in large running waters: Rhine River, Oberwarnow River, and Lippe River in Ger-
many (CZERNIN-CHUDENITZ 1958, KALBE 1963, QUIRMBACH 1912, SCHMITZ 1986); Danube River
and its oxbows (BERECZKY & NOSEK 1993, MATIS & TIRJAKOYAtggAb,NOSEK & BERECZKY 1981,
1994); Theiss River, Yugoslavia (PUJIN et al. 1984); up to 2800 ind. 1-r in the betamesosaprobic Volga River
(MAMAEVA 1979, MAMAYEVA 1975) and Newa River, USSR (SKORIKOW 1905). Rare in lowland brooks
with a peak in spring (HEUSS 1976), and in Sphagnum bogs (SELIN & KOSKINEN 1988, ZACHARIAS
1903).
6t9

Oligotrichida
Table: Autecological data of Codonella cratera. Cohtmn 1, from PATRICK et al. (1967; many analyses from the Savannah River, USA);
column 2, from FOISSNER & WILBERT (1979;2 analyses from a eutrophic lake [Obertrumersee] in Salzburg, Austria); columns 3 and4,
from RECK (1987; many analyses from a eutrophic lake [Plußsee] in Germany; column 4 includes only data for >500 ind. lr); column 5,
from BRAARUD et al. (1928; 5 analyses from a Norwegian lake).
Parameters References
-
1 2 J 4 5
Temperature ("C) 23-28 n .t-18.5 3.5-n .l 3 .5-4. 8 7 .6-8.4
pH 6.5-7 .0 8.7-8.9 7 .3-9.1 1 .3-7.4 s.95-6.00
o, (mg I') 5-7 4.1-6.5 0.9-t3.9 2.2-6.5
Oz (saturation 7o) I -tt8 17 -50 82-85
BoD: (mg I') 0.5-1.0
Coz (mg I') 5-10
PO+3 -P (mg I ') 0.003-0.017
l')
NH+*-N (mg 0.009-0.03 r <0.02 0.03-0.3
NO: -N (mg I') 0.07-0.2 0.16-0.2
NOz -N (mg I') 0.001-<0.007 Ja
Cl (mg lr) 5-< 10
rNHrN.
Autecological data: Feeds on diatoms, probably also on green algae and flagellates (PACE 1982); according to
SIME-NGANDO & HARTMANN (1991), Codonella cratera is a non-selective, omnivorous species. Biomass
of 106 specimens 20mg (FOISSNER et al. 1991, NEBRAT 1975, NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991),
40 mg (SCHWEIZER 1994). 45-55 mg (BÜRGI et al. 1985; MAMAEVA 1979; SIME-NGANDO & HART-
MANN 1991; obviously calculated from lorica dimensions or misidentifications). NEBRAT (1975) counted
289ind. I | (0.016mg1-') in a Russian reservoir, corresponding to an oxygen consumption of lS0plhrfor 106
specimens. KUZNETSOVA & ARSLANOVA (1981) found 4040 ind.lr in a Russian pond in August, with a
monthly biomass-production of about 109 mg m-3. Doubling time up to 17 d at3J oC and2.14.3 d at 19-22'C
(POURRIOT et al. l99l), according to PETROVA et al. (1916) only 10.2h at 2O oC. Eurythermic (PRIMC
1986); according to FINDENEGG (1953), C. cratera occurs throughoutthe year at4.7*18.3 'C showing an opti-
mum between 8-15 "C (May, June) and a maximum abundance at ll.2 "C. TAYLOR & LEAN (1981) reported
a phosphorous turnover of 0.54 pl ind.-r h-r. Autecological data -+ Ecogram and -+ Table.
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded
from Eurasia and South America. Very com-
mon in lentic and large lotic waters, obvi-
ously without preference for a specific tro-
phic state. Euplanktonic, eurythermic, oligo-
euryhaline, and common in all seasons with
clistinct peak in spring, when phytoplankton,
the preferred food, is abundant. Saprobic
classification according to FOISSNER et al.
( 1991): oligosaprobic to betamesosaprobic (o
O,O a - 1, b - 6,I=3, SI = 1.6).
o a
oo a
o
a
a a-.O o
tt- ,o.
r)
.{. ^t :rt ,- at l . Iicogram (from HALME 1958). Nurnbers (ind. I of
Itt eo'c Codonella c'ratera plot as a function of temperature (t)
6c rrnd salinity (%o).
620

Oligotrichida
A M - Ft F= F= F F= F-F§'HB*EI F= Fl El Elr-
/c^\RD l-nlO -- 1 26- 11
1
t;
SS
UM
Codonella
c ra tera +
B
MA
-/L
(!E::l
f=l fi
b?fi"1ö"§B I
&#,ffi?
w,Än
Codonelln cratera (l-3, fiorn FOISSNER & WILBERT 1919;4, f}om ENTZ 1885;5, fiom DADAY ltt92; 6,8, fiorr
KAHL 1932;7, from LEIDY 1879;9, from KAHL 1932,redrawn from DADAY 1892;10, from NIE 1933; 11, from
FAURE-FREMIET 1924. 1, 2, composites from live [body shape, lorica] and protargol-impregnated [ciliary pattern] speci-
mens; 3, protargol impregnation; 4-ll, in vivo). 1, 2,618, 10, 11: Ventral and dorsal views, total length (lorica and cell
without cilia) 70-80 pm. Arrowhead in (8) marks stalk anchoring cell to lorica. Cilia in Figures l, 2 partially not shown in
full length for the sake of clarity. 3: Diagram of ciliary pattern. 4, 51 7 ,9: Lorica shape variants, each about 50 pm long. AM
= circular adoral zone of membranelles, BC = buccal cavity, C = cilia, CV = contractile vacuole, DI = diatom in food vacu-
ole, FV = food vacuole, IM = slightly elongated, inner (buccal) adoral membranelles, IP = irregularly shaped (mineral?) par-
ticles often forming the main portion of xenosomes, L = lorica, LF = left lateral field of narrowly spaced ciliary rows, MA =
macronuclear nodules, MI = micronucleus, MIN = mineral particles, MY = myonemes in posterior portion retract cell into
lorica , SS = silverline system after dry silver nitrate impregnation, ST = stalk, UM = undulating membrane in buccal cavity,
VL = ventrolateral ciliary row composed of single basal bodies, VR = elongated ventral ciliary row composed of basal body
pairs, CR 1-32 = ciliary rows.
621

Oligotrichida
17a
Codonella cratera (12-15, tiom FOISSNER & WILBERT 1979; 16, fTom BERNATZKY et al. l9t3 l; l7a, b, oli-cinals.
12-15,protargol impregnation; 16, scanning electron micrograph; 11a,b,in vivo bright field micrographs). 12-15: Right
and left lateral views and details of ciliary pattem (-+ character 6 for detailed explanation). 16, 17a, b: Loricae mainly com-
posed of irregularly shaped (mineral?) particles. Arrow in (16) marks posterior end of collar, which consists of 4 turns (ar-
rowheads). The lorica shown in (l7b) is slightly squeezed, that is, not natural shape, to show the inhabitant. AM = circular
adoral zone of membranelles, LF = left lateral field of narrowly spaced ciliary rows, MA = macronuclear nodules, MY =
myonemes in posterior portion retract cell into lorica, ST = stalk, VL = ventrolateral ciliary row composed of single basal
bodies, VR = elongated ventral ciliary row composed of basal body pairs.
622

Oligotrichida
Codonella craterü (ltl,lionr FOISSNER & WILBERT 1979 19-26, Iiom BERNATZKY et al. l98l). 18-26: Scatruitrg electrou tnicro-
graphsofadultloricaeanddetailofalorica(23).Thecollarhas4.5spiral(arrowsin25,26marksitewhereturncommences)turns (arrows
in 18, 20). Note variability in shape and composition (made mainly of diatom frustules or mineral particles, depending on seston
composition; see also following figures). DI = diatoms as xenosomes, IP = irregular shaped (mineral?) particles.
623

Oligotrichida
Codonella cratera 127 -35, scanning electron rlicrographs liom BERNATZKY et al. I 98 I ). 27-29, 32,34: Adulr loricae ancl
details of adult loricae. The lorica in (28) consists mainly of centric diatoms. Frequently, the spiral turns of the collar are rec-
ognizable only on the inner side of the lorica wall (29).Size and shape of lorica and type of xenosomes used (mineral parti-
cles, diatoms, etc.) depend to a certain extent on season and habitat. 30,31,35: Juvenile loricae and detail fromjuvenile lor-
ica, respectively. Note lack of collar. Such specimens are easily misidentified as distinct species. 33: Frontal view showing
circular lorica opening. DI = diatoms as xenosomes, IP = irregularly shaped (mineral?) particles.
624

Oligotrichida
Codonelln cratera (36-39, original scanning electron micrographs fi'orn a population of a lake [Wallerseel ir.r Austria).
36-39: Inhabited loricae (36-38) and empty lorica in oblique frontal view (39). Note that the collar tums are very prominent
when viewed from inside (39), but inconspicuous outside because masked by agglutinated diatom frustules. AM = adoral
zone of membranelles forming prominent circular adoral zone, DI = diatom frustules, the dominant xenosome type of this
population, IP = inorganic particles (quartz platelets).
625

Oligotrichida
Membranicola nov. gen.
D i ag n o s i s: Tintinnidiidae withtubular, agglutinatedlorica subterminally closedby a distinctmembrane, in
the centre of which the cell is attached. Two ventral organelles; anterior portion of leftmost somatic ciliary rows
distinctly curved ventrally.
Ty p e s p e c i e s: Membranicola tamari nov. spec.
Etymo 1o gy: Compositeof theLatin rounmembrana(membrane) andtheLatinverb cola(inhabiting),mean-
ing "a ciliate attached to a membrane". Feminine gender.
Comparison with related genera: Whenwecommencedthefieldworkforthisbook,wedidnot
expect to find a new tintinnid because freshwater tintinnids are well known and have a small diversity. It was thus
a great surprise to discover a new species, which even belongs to a new genlus. Membranicola tamari is unique
among the known freshwater and marine tintinnids in having the lorica subterminally closed by a membrane,
which is secreted during lorica construction (Fig. 23,24) and rather fragile because it is poorly preserved in speci-
mens prepared for scanning electron microscopy (Fig.22). The stalklike posterior end of the cell is attached to the
centre of the membrane, which stains with methylene blue (Fig. 25) and invariably spreads in the subterminal por-
tion of the tubular lorica (Fig. l, 12, 1922, 25). Thus, both lorica ends are open.
The location and sffucture of the ventral organelles (Fig. 1 , 4, 5, 7 , 9, 38, 40) are as in other members of the
family, e.g. -) Tintinnidium fluviatile. Likewise, the somatic ciliary pattem is similar to members of -+ Tintinnid-
ium (dlkinetids having only the posterior basal body ciliated), except for the leftmost ciliary rows, whose anterior
portion is distinctly curved, extending almost horizontally to the main body axis (Fig. l, 3,5,9,26,29).
Membranicola tamari nov. spec.
D i a g n o s i s: Cell with stalk-like process invivo about 120x40pm, broadly ellipsoidal with stalkaboutas
long as body proper. Two macronuclear nodules with single micronucleus in between. On average 12 adoral mem-
branelles and 1,2 somatic ciliary rows with highly differentiated ciliature as shown in Figure 6. Lorica in vivo
about 117 x 43 pm, tubular, mainly composed of agglutinated diatom frustules.
Type location: Planktonof aeutrophiclake(Wallersee)inSalzburg,Austria(47"55'N, 13"10'E).
Type s lide s: Five slides (1 holotype,4paratypes) withprotargol-impregnated specimenshavebeendepos-
ited in the Oberösterreichische Landesmuseum inLinz (LI), Austria.
D e d i c ati on: We dedicatethis new species toDr. HenTTAMAR (Indiana StateUniversity, USA), who sig-
nificantly contributed to the knowledge of plankton ciliates and enriched our book with his excellent micrographs.
D i f f e re n t i al d i a g n o s i s (detailedmorphometric data, see Table below)
1) Body of about same size as lorica, that is,90-160 x3545 pm, including stalk-like, contractile cytoplasmic
process anchoring cell to lorica membrane; stalk at least as long as body proper in fully extended specimens,
which protrude up to 25pm beyond lorica opening (Fig. 1, 10, 30, 33); contracted specimens about half as
long as extended ones.
2) Body of fully extended specimens broadly ellipsoidal with posterior half narrowed stalk-like and anchored to
centre of subterminal lorica membrane (Fig. 1, 30, 31); slightly contracted specimens cylindrical. (Fig.9, 12,
13, l9). Underneath ventral anterior end an inconspicuous bulge bearing two short, highly specialized ciliary
rows ("ventral organelles", Fig. 1,4,38, 39). Cell retracts into or leaves lorica when disturbed (Fig. 12, 19).
3) Two ellipsoidal, closely spaced macronuclear nodules in mid-body. Micronucleus between or at edge of abut-
ting macronuclear beads, conspicuous in vivo because compact and up to 8 trrm across (Fig. 1,4,7,20,23,35).
4) Contractile vacuole near anterior end, that is, in peristomial bottom, which can move up and down (Fig. 1, 12, l3).
5) Cytoplasm, although colourless, often spotted due to 5-10 pm sized food vacuoles with algal remnants.
626

Oligotrichida
6) 10-l 1, usually 10 ciliary rows on ellipsoidal body portion. Rows composed of basal body pairs having only
the posterior basal body ciliated, of similar length, except for leftmost row (number l0 or 1l), which is dis-
tinctly shorter than rows 44; anterior portion of leftmost two rows conspicuously curved ventrally, extending
almost horizontally to longitudinal body axis; length of cilia as shown in Figure 6, that is, highly different
within and among ciliary rows (Fig. 1-l l, 26-29, 34, 31 , 38, 41). Two short, transversely oriented ventral cili-
ary rows (organelles) with conspicuous, 20-25 pm long cilia on bulge underneath adoral zone of
membranelles; anterior row (ventral organelle 2) invariably composed of 8 oblique basal body pairs having
only the posterior basal body ciliated; posterior row (ventral organelle 1) roughly parallel to anterior row, left
third usually curved posteriorly, composed of 16-20 ciliated basal body pairs (Fig. 1-5,7,9,10,29,38-41).
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of 12-13 (15 in Fuschlsee population, Fig. 39) mem-
branelles with 20-25 pm long cilia forming conspicuous, circular adoral zone; undulating membrane, although
rather long, inconspicuous because deep in buccal cavity (Fig. l-5, 12, 13,28,31-34).
8) Continuously swimming, that is, not jumping and spinning like other oligotrichs.
e) Lorica in vivo 90-160 x 40-50pm (outer dimensions of inhabited and very likely mature loricae, mean =
ll7 x43 pilr, n = 19; prepared loricae shorter probably due to some shrinkage, --) Table), tubular, rarely
slightly curved andlor slightly widened anteriorly or posteriorly, flexible, consists mainly of agglutinated dia-
tom frustules, even ifmineralic seston is abundant, both ends transversely truncate and slightly irregular due to
projecting agglutinated material; subterminal lorica membrane 10-30 pm apart from posterior end, thin and
hyaline, thus easily overlooked in deserted loricae (Fig. 1, 10,12-25,30-36).
Similar species
Live specimens of M. tamari are easily identified by the subterminal lorica membrane. However, the meinbrane is
often lost in deserted loricae and/or preserved specimens, which can be identified by two features: (i) the tubular,
rather compact and stout lorica (length : width ratio 2.7 :l , >3: I in -+ Tintinnidium fluviatile, -+ T . pusillum and -+
Tintinnopsis cylindrata) and (ii) the 2 macronuclear nodules. The last character is, however, found in two other
freshwater tintinnids, namely -+ Codonella cratera (lorica amphoriform, many ciliary rows forming dense field on
left side) and -> Tintinnidium ephemeridum (lorica gelatinous and funnel-shaped, ciliary pattern not known). 2
(subterminal lorica membrane), 3 (two macronuclear nodules), 9 are key characters for identification.
Table: Morphometric data from Membranicola tamari.
Character Mean M SD SE CV Min Max n
Lorica, length in vivo I 16.8 120 fl.8 3.8 15.3 90 160 22
Lorica, width in vivo 42.4 40 2.9 0.6 6.9 40 50 22
Lorica, length 89.1 93 14.0 3.1 15.1 60 I t3 20
Lorica, width 49.4 50 -,] 11 . -) 0.1 6.6 43 56 20
Body, length 35.8 36 5.5 1.2 15.2 28 47 20
Body,, width 28.l 29 2.5 0.6 8.6 25 37 20
tl
Macronuclear nodules, length 12.4 t2 1.7 0.4 13.6 10 24
Macronuclear nodules, width 8.0 B 1.5 0.3 18.5 6 t2 24
Micronucleus, length 5.0 5 0.2 0.1 3.2 4.5 5 l0
Micronucleus, width 4.4 4 0.5 0.2 tt.7 4 5 10
Somatic ciliary row l, length t] .B 1B 2.0 0.8 I 1.5 15 2t 6
tl
Somatic ciliary row 2,length 20.4 2l 2.4 1.1 1 1.8 23 5
Somatic ciliary row 3, length 2t.3 21 2.4 0.9 I 1.9 IB 25 1
Somatic ciliary row 4,length 24.0 25 2.9 1.0 12.2 20 29 8
Somatic ciliary row 5, length 22.0 23 2.1 0.7 9.4 1B 25 8
Somatic ciliary row 6, length 20.t 21 t.6 0.6 1.7 17 22 B
Somatic ciliary row 7, length t7.1 T7 2.1 0.8 I 1.6 t6 2t 7
621

Oligotrichida
Characterr Mean M SD SE CV Min Max n
Somatic ciliary row B, length2 t6.l t6 1.4 0.5 8.3 15 19 1
Somatic ciliary row 9, length2 1 5.0 15 1.0 0.4 6.1 13 16 l
Somatic ciliary row 10, length2 t2.6 I2 1.1 0.4 9.0 11 l4 l
Macronuclear nodules, number 2.0 2 0 0 0 2 2 20
Micronuclei, number 1.0 I 0 0 0 I 1 t2
Adoral membranelles, number 12.4 12 0.5 0.2 4.2 t2 13 9
Somatic ciliary row 1, number of basal body pairs t5.l 15 t.2 0.5 1.1 t4 t1 5
Somatic ciliary row 2, number of basal body pairs t4.0 t4 t2 0.6 B.B t3 t6 5
Somatic ciliary row 3, number of basal body pairs t] .B t7 r.6 0.6 B.B t6 20 1
Somatic ciliary row 4, number of basal body pairs 21.6 2t 1.5 0.1 1.0 20 24 5
Somatic ciliary row 5, number of basal body pairs 26.1 26 2.0 0.8 1.4 25 30 6
Somatic ciliary row 6, number of basal body pairs 28.9 28 3.0 1.1 10.3 26 34 7
Somatic ciliary row 7 , number of basal body pairs 2t .0 27 1.6 0.6 5.1 25 29 6
Somatic ciliary row B, number of basal body pairs 24.8 25 1.9 0.8 1.8 22 21 6
Somatic ciliary row 9, number of basal body pairs 22.2 23 1.0 0.4 4.4 2l 23 6
Somatic ciliary row 10, number of basal body pairs fl.5 1B 2.1 1.1 15.6 13 20 6
I
Data based on protargol-impregnated and mounted specimens from field. Measurements in pm. CV = coefficient of variation in 7o, M =
median, Max = maximum, 2 M ean = arithmetic mean, Min = minimum, n = number of specimens investigated, SD = standard deviation, SE
= standard error ofmean. Measured from proximal end of adoral membranelles to posterior end of row, that is, without curve de-
scribed by the row.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: As yet found at type location and in some oligo- to mesotrophic lakes (Mondsee,
Fuschlsee) near type location. However, M. tamari is very likely widespread because it has been found by M.
KREUTZ (pers. comm., and Figure in Frontispiece) in Lake Constance. Furthermore, M. tamari very likely occurs
also in the Volga Basin, where it has been misidentified by MAMAEVA (1979) as Tintinnidiumfluviatile f. cylin-
drica GAIEWSKAJA, 1933, as indicated by the stout lorica and the two macronuclear nodules (see Figures below).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Feeds on various algae. Euplanktonic and possibly preferring
mesotrophic conditions. Biomass of 106 medium-sized specimens about 50 mg. Very likely holarctic.
Figure a: Tintinnidium fluvia-
tile f. cylindrica (from GA-
JEWSKAJA 1933). This vari-
ety has a soft and slender lor-
ica (100-125 x30-32 pm) and
a single macronucleus.
Figures b-d: Tintinnidium flu-
viatilie f . cylindrica from MA-
MAEVA (1979a), which has a
stout lorica (101 x 38 pm)
and two macronuclear nodu-
les, cannot be identical with
the form described by GA-
JEWSKAJA (1933), but is
very likely Memhranicola ta-
mari. Figure d shows a divid-
ing cell. MA = macronuclear
nodules.
628

Oligotrichida
-VR
>lM
t
t
I -CR
t
,tJ- :1,;Iiai,'
-UM [e:ä,t
/
MA-
I M
tip:;:iB,ä''-B'*-
AM
:l :l F-a F= ffiI\\NRt ffi§[Nt :l :l :l I EF
4 I -t1 10 - I -t s-CR I
IF
tffitft'J
llllllllltll/z I
nfi|finw&-
- :E
VR1+2
:L
Membranicola tamari =:tE
:E
6
Merubranicolatantarilront type location (1,6, in vivo; 2-5, protargol impregnation). 1: Ventrolateral view of arepresenta-
tive specimen. Arrowheads mark main genus character, that is, the subterminal membrane to which the cell is attached.
Length of lorica 1 18 pm. 2, 3: Ciliary pattem of right and left side of same specimen, 42 pm. For details, see Figures 5, 6. 4:
Ciliary pattern of ventral side, 35 pm. 5: Diagram of ciliary pattem. The whole ciliature consists of basal body pairs, which
have only the posterior basal body ciliated. 6: Diagram of cilia length; longest cilia 10 trrm. AM = adoral zone of mem-
branelles, CR = ciliary rows, IM = slightly elongated, inner (buccal) adoral membranelles, MA = macronuclear nodules, ME
= lorica membrane, MI = micronucleus, MY = myonemes (contractile fibres), UM = undulating membrane, VR = ventral or-
ganelles (ventral ciliary rows), 1-10 = ciliary rows composed ofbasal body pairs.
629

Oligotrichida
,:*;:;vn
Membranicola tanxari \7, tJ, Mondsee population, protargol irnpregnation; 9-l l, Fusclrlsee population, scanning electron nricrographs.). 7, 8:
Ciliary pattern ofventral and dorsal side ofa very early divider, length 45 pm. The anlage (A) for the new (daughter) oral apparatus devel-
ops undemeath ciliary rows 8-l 1. 9: Left lateral view of an early divider. Arrow marks ventral organelles. 10: Right lateral view of anterior
portion showing main ciliary organelles and lorica composed mainly of diatom frustules. 11: Ciliary pattern of dorsal side showing elon-
gated cilia (arrowheads) in rows 6 and 7. A = anlage ofnew oral apparatus, AM = adoral zone ofmembranelles, DI = diatom frustules, IM =
inner (buccal) adoral membranelles, MA = macronuclear nodules, MI = micronucleus, ST = statk-like posterior end, UM = undulating mem-
brane, VR = ventral organelles (ciliary rows; 1 and 2 confused in Fig. 10!), 1-1 1 = ciliary rows composed of basal body pairs.
630

Oligotrichida
16
Membranicola tamarit'ron type locatiorl (12-16, in vivo !2-l5l and atier nrethylene blue stain [6]) and ti'or.r.r a Iake (Fuschlsee) near type
location (17, 18, scanning electron micrographs). 12, 13: Same specimen showing pumping peristomial bottom (arrowheads) and stalk at-
tached to the subterminal membrane closing the lorica (arrow). 14-1.8: The lorica is comparatively broad, composed mainly of diatom frus-
tules, and stains lightly with methylene blue (16).
63t

-
Oligotrichida
* .::::::::::: t:.
25
Membranicolatamari(19-21,23,24, in vivo; 22, scanning electron micrograph; 25, methylene blue stain). 19-25: This se-
ries of micrographs shows the main species character, that is, the 2 macronuclear nodules with a single micronucleus in be-
tween (20, 23), and the main genus character, that is, the subterminal membrane (anows) closing the lorica. The stalk of the
cells is attached to the centre of the membrane, which is poorly preserved in SEM preparations (22), but stains with methyl-
ene blue (25), and is formed very early during lorica construction (23,24). MA = macronuclear nodules, MI = micronucleus,
ST = stalk.
632

Oligotrichida
Membranicola tamari lscanning electron micrographs ol'a population fi'om the Fuschlsee, a lake near the type location). 26,
27 r 29: Anterior cell region showing one of the main genus characters, that is, the curved anterior portion of ciliary rows 9
and 10 (cp. Fig. 5), whose cilia are of very different length (cp. Fig. 6). 28: The cilia of the adoral membranelles are fused
plate-like distally, except for a single cilium at the outer edge (arrows). AM = adoral zone ofmembranelles, VR = ventral or-
ganelles, 6-10 = ciliary rows composed of basal body pairs.
633

Oligotrichida
32
Membranicola tamart \30-32,35, light rnicrographs ti'om type population; 33, 34, 36, 37, scanning electron micrographs fl'on.r Fuschlsee
specimens, a lake near the type location). 30,31: Slightly curved lorica with fully extended cell in bright field and interference contrast. 32:
Frontal view of lorica. 33, 36: The lorica is stout and composed mainly of diatom frustules. 34, 37: Same specimen showing details of the
complicated ciliation ofrows 6,7,8 (cp. Fig. 6).35: The nuclear apparatus is an important species character of M. tamari because it consists
of two macronuclear nodules with a single micronucleus in between. AM = adoral zone of membranelles, MA = macronuclear nodules, MI =
micronucleus, 6-lO = ciliary rows composed of basal body pairs.
634

Oligotrichida
4fl
Membranicola tamari (38-41, scanning electror.r uricrographs ol' specirnens frour the Fuschlscc, a lake near the type
location). 3840: Membranicola tamari has two ventral organelles (specialized, short ciliary rows underneath the buccal
opening, cp. Fig. l, 5), which have long, paired cilia and extend on a rather conspicuous lobe (39, arrow). The cilia at the left
end of organelle I are strongly shortened. The function of the ventral organelles is not known. Note that the specimens from
Fuschlsee have slightly more (15 vs. 12; Fig. 4, 39) adoral membranelles than those from Wallersee (type location). 41: Pos-
terior half of a middle divider showing the adoral membranelles of the daughter cell developing in a deep pouch. The so-
matic ciliature, including the ventral organelles, have already been formed. A = anlage of daughter oral apparatus, VRl, 2 =
ventral organelles, T-10 = ciliary rows composed ofbasal body pairs.
635

bligotrichida
T irutinnidium e phe me ridum HILLIARD, 1 e68
1968 Tintinnidium ephemeridum HILLIARD, Hydrobiologia, 31: 386.
1979 Tintinnopsis cylindrara - MAMAEVA, Infusoria of the Volga Basin (partim; p. 61, Fig. 6).
Taxonomy
Previously, we supposed synonymy with -+ Tintinnopsis cylindrata because the ciliary pattern was not known
and two macronuclear nodules appeared unlikely in this kind of tintinnid (FOISSNER et al. 1991, p. 178). How-
ever, --) Membranicola tamari, which we recently discovered, also has two macronuclear
nodules and a hyaline lorica. Thus, we include HILLIARD's species in this monograph, al-
though the ciliary pattern is still unknown.
Diiterent ial diagnosis
1) Body size in vivo about 175 x 50 pm (length 75 pm in original description, very likely par
lapsus because Figure shows about 170 pm and lorica length is 128-160 pm).
2) Body obconical with narrowed posterior portion anchored to lorica bottom (Fig. 2,3).
3) Two ellipsoidal macronuclear nodules near mid-body (Fi5.2,3).
4) Contractile vacuole not known, likely near anterior end, as in other tintinnids.
5) Cytoplasm likely without peculiarities.
6) Ciliary pattem not known.
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of about 12 membranelles formin-u
prominent, circular adoral zone (Fig.2,3).
8) Continuously swimming, that is, not jumping and spinning like other oligotrichs.
9) Lorica 128-160 x 64J5 pm (length x oral diameter; n = ?; according to MAMAEVA only
about 60 pm long), funnel-shaped, that is, walls converge in cone-like manner subtending
an angle of 3G-40 degrees, anterior end transverse truncate, posterior rounded; gelatinous
and undifferentiated, usually covered with various algae and iron bacteria (Fig. l*3). HIL-
LIARD found 39 algal taxa and two Leptothrix species agglutinated to the lorica.
Similar species
Tintinnidium ephemeridum has a unique character combination, namely, a conical, membra-
nous lorica and two macronuclear nodules. The first feature is unique, the second shared with
)
Membranicola tamari (lorica broadly cylindrical and subterminally closed by a membrane)
and -+ Codonella cratera (lorica urceolate). 3,9'are key characters for identification. Tintüuidium ephe-
meridum in vivo ( 1,
2, from HILLIARD
Ecology 1968; 3, from MA-
MAEVA 1919). 1:
Empty lorica. 2, 3:
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic. HILLIARD (1968) discovered T. ephemeridum Total views, lorica
in the Gene Lake of the north-central Kenai Peninsula, Alaska, USA. MAMAEVA (1919) length 128-160 pm,
found it in the Volga Basin, Russia (Fig. 3). about 60 pm. Note
the 2 macronuclear
Autecological data and ecological summary: Food not known. Biomass of 106 specimens nodules and the ob-
conical shape of the
about 50 mg. Very likely a rare species. Reliably recorded from North America and Europe cell and the lorica.
only. Euplanktonic in lakes and large rivers. Ma = macronuclear
nodules.
636

Oligotrichida
Tintinnidium fluviali/e (srprN, 1863) KENr, 1881
1863 Tintinnus tluviatilis STEIN, Amtl. Ber. Dt. Natrf. u. Arzte, 31: 161(without illustration).
1881 Tintinnidiumfluviatilis STEIN - KENT, Manual Infusoria II, p. 611 (first reviser and combining author;
his specimens were sessile and thus probably belong toTintinnidium semiciliatum).
1885 Tintinnidium fluviatile STEIN - ENTZ, Mitt. zool. Stn Neapel, 6: 186 (detailed redescription from life;
first illustrations).
1924 Tintinnidium fluviatile STEIN - FAUnp-f'nEMIET, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg. , 6: 84 (detailed redescription
from life).
1929 T inrinnidium Jluv iarile (STEIN) KENT - KOFOID & CAMPBELL, Univ. Calif. Publs Zool.,,34: 10 (revi-
sion).
1932 Tintinnidium fluviatile STEIN, 1863 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 25i 5 16 (revision).
1979 Tintinnidium fluviatile STEIN, 1863 - FOISSNER & WILBERT, J. Protozool.,26: 94 (authoritative rede-
scription from life and after silver impregnation).
1981 Tintinnidium.fluviatile STEIN, 1863 - BERNATZKY, FOISSNER & SCHUBERT, Zool. Scr., l0: 83
(morphology and morphometry of lorica).
l99l Tintinnidium.fluviatile (STEIN, 1863) KENT, 1881 - FOISSNER, BLATTERER, BERGER & KOH-
MANN, Informationsber. Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll91: 163 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is,
taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
This species is well-known due to the detailed redescription by FOISSNER & WILBERT (1979). Several older
(for review, see KOFOID & CAMPBELL 1929) and recent marine records (e.g. GOLD & MORALES 1975,
CAPRIULO 1982) very likely belong to other, similar species (e.g.T.inquilinum,T. mucicola), which, how-
ever, needs to be confirmed by silver impregnation. This applies also to some freshwater varieties (e.g. T. flu-
viatile cylindrica GAJEWSKAJA 1933) and benthic records of T.fluviatile (e.g. KRIEG & RIEDEL-LORJE
1991, LIYEPA 1984b), which were probably T. semiciliatum (detalled description, see FOISSNER et al. 1991,
p.172). These varieties (subspecies? species?) are not treated in the present monograph because they have not
yet been confirmed by detailed reinvestigations. The ecological data are ascribed to the nominal form, that is 7.
fluviatile.
Differential diagnosis
1) Body size in vivo about |2V2OO x 25-35 pm, including the about 60 pm long stalk-like cytoplasmic process
anchoring cell to lorica; contracted specimens about 30-50;rm long.
2) Body cylindrical with posterior portion elongated stalk-like and anchored to lorica bottom (Fig. 1, 2,4,7,
l0). Underneath ventral anterior end an inconspicuous bulge bearing two short, highly specialized ciliary
rows ("ventral organelles"). Cell retracts into or leaves lorica when disturbed (Fig. 5, 6, 8, 10).
3) Macronucleus ellipsoidal, near mid-body. Micronucleus ellipsoidal (Fig. 1).
4) Contractile vacuole near anterior end (Fig. 1,2,1).
s) Cytoplasm colourless, however, cells often colourful due to ingested algae.
6) 10-1 l, usually 10 ciliary rows on cylindrical body portion. Rows composed of basal body pairsl anterior
three pairs (rarely none or 1 to 2 only) of each row with 9-12 pm long cilia, remaining pairs with 5-8 pm
long bristles emerging from posterior basal body. Two short, oblique ventral ciliary rows (organelles) on
bulge underneath adoral zone of membranelles (Fig. 1). Details of ciliary pattern, see Figure 3.
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of 12-14 ( 16 according to ENTZ) membranelles form-
ing prominent, circular adoral zone; undulating membrane, although rather long, inconspicuous because deep
in buccal cavity (Fig. 1-4).
631

Oligotrichida
8) Continuously swimming, that is, not jumping and spinning like other oligotrichs.
e) Lorica 95-161 x 38-49 pm (mean = 135 x 43pm, n = 38; outer dimensions of 4 populations studied by
BERNATZKY et al. l98l); inner diameter of lorica 20-35 pm according to ENTZ. RECK (1987) found the
following dimensions: finished loricae 255-280 x 55-60 pm (n = 5), unfinished loricae 15-172 x 35-50 pm
(n= l7), loricaereadyfordivision350-380x20J0 pm(n=5).Loricasoftandflexibleinconsistency,cy-
lindrical to slightly funnel-shaped, posterior end rounded or truncated, consists of yellowish to brownish, mu-
cous substance to which diatoms and organic and inorganic particles (xenosomes) agglutinate (Fig. 1,2,4,5,
7,9-18).
Similar species
Identification of live specimens of Tintinnidium and -+ Tintinnopsis is rather difficult because the shape and size
of the lorica depend to a certain extent on season, habitat, and collection circumstances; thus, unambiguous deter-
mination usually requires silver impregnation of the ciliary pattern. Tintinnidium fluviatile and -+ T. pusillum
have a very similar ciliary pattern and are thus best separated by the size and consistency of the lorica: usually
distinctly >100 x 30 pm and very soft versus usually <100 x 30 pm and rather stable. Tintinnidium semic'iliatum
(STERKI, 1879) KENT, 1881 is usually benthic and sessile and has more (12-15, usually l3 or 14) ciliary rows,
which are composed of single basal bodies, except anteriorly (detailed description, see FOISSNER et al. 199 I , p.
172). --> Tintinnopsis cylindrata is usually smaller (lorica length about 100 pm) and the ciliary rows consist of
single basal bodies. -+ Memhranicola tamari, -+ Codonella cratera, and Stenosemella lacustr"is (Fig. la, b by ->
Codonella cratera) have very solid loricae which are broadly cylindrical, amphoriform or cordiform; further-
more, they have two macronuclear nodules and another ciliary pattern. 3 (single macronucleus), 6, 9 are key
characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Very common in lakes, ponds, and reservoirs, peaking in spring; never recorded
from ephemeral water bodies, indicating that it cannot make resting cysts. Locus classicus is Prague (Czech Re-
public), where STEIN (1863) discovered T. fluviatile in ponds. FOISSNER & WILBERT (1979) found great
numbers in a lake near Salzburg, Austria. Further records, most not substantiated by morphological data: meso-
trophic lake in Austria (SALBRECHTER & ARNDT 1994); dominant in Lake Windermere, England (LAY-
BOURN-PARRY & ROGERSON 1993); oligotrophic lake in Scotland (LAYBOURN-PARYY et al. 1994); lake
in Estonia (SCHNEIDER 1909); up to l0 ind.lr at 4 m in Finnish lakes IJARNEFELT 1934a. b); eutrophic lake
in France (AMBLARD et al. 1994); lakes in northem Germany and very common in the temperate, oligotrophic
Lake Stechlin (APSTEIN 1893, SCHÖNBORN 1985); eutrophic to polytrophic lake in Germany (PACKROFF
1992, PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991); dominant in the meso- to eutrophic Lake Constance, Germany, during
spring peak of phytoplankton (SCHWEIZER 1994); in a eutrophic lake in Germany throughout the year with
conspicuous peak (47 000 ind.lr, that is,687a of ciliate abundance) in spring (ZIMMERMANN 1994, 1996);
slightly eutrophic reservoir in Germany with peak in May (BEUSCHOLD 196l); ponds in Hungary (KRE-
PUSKA 1930);20 (1 m), 60 (5 m), 100 (10 m), 20 (20 m), and 40 (28 m) ind. l-r in a Norwegian lake during Oc-
tober (BRAARUD et al. 1929); up to 100 ind.lr in a reservoir in Portugal from November to April (VASCON-
CELOS 1990); 12000ind.l-rin a lake in Switzerland (ODERMATT 1970) and other Swiss lakes of different
trophic states (BÜRGI et al. 1985, NAEF & MARTIN 1990); maximum abundances (about 900 ind. 1-r) in the
hypolimnion of a Yugoslavian karst lake in spring (PRIMC 1986); almost 30000 ind.lr in the eutrophic Beloe
I
Lake in Russia during spring (SHCHERBAKOV 1969); dominant (42 7o) with up to 3300 ind. I (0.062 mg l-')
at 6m in the summer plankton of a Ukrainian reservoir (NEBRAT 1975); up to 2100ind. 1-r in Arctic tundra
lakes (LAVRENTYEV 1994); Tintinnidium fluviatile cylindrica showed high densities in the winter plankton of
Lake Baikal, down to 200 m (GAJEWSKAJA 1933, p. 115-120:. see Figure a by + Membranicola tamari); of-
ten dominant in Russian ponds, lakes, and reservoirs of all trophic states (e.g. ALEKPEROY 1982, 1983, 1984a,
BELOVA 1994, KORNIYENKO 1970, KRAVCHENKO 1969, LAVRENTYEV 1989, LIYEPA I984b,
LUK'JANOVIÖ 1913, MAMAEVA 1976A, MIRABDULLAEV 1989, MORDUKHAJ-BOLTOVSKAJA I965,
MYLNIKOVA 1992a, b, SMIRNOVA 1987, ZHARIKOV 1983, 1992, ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992); Lake
638

Oligotrichida
Donghu, China (GONG 1986); pond and Lake Biwa in Japan (HATANO & WATANABE 1981, MORI 1970);
Saginaw Bay, Lake Huron, USA (LAVRENTYEV et al. 1995); in the eutrophic Lake Oglethorpe, USA, during
February and April (SANDERS et al. 1989); eutrophic Lake Okeechobee in Florida, USA (HAVENS & BEA-
VER 1997); Argentina (SECKT 1924).
Also common in the plankton of large rivers: Rhine River (CZERNIN-CHUDENITZ 1958, SCHMITZ 1986);
I1000 ind. lr in the Elbe River and its estuarl, Germany (CASPERS & SCHULZ 1962, NÖTHLICH 1912,
SCHULZ 1965); channel in Hamburg, Germany (CASPERS & SCHULZ 1960); up to 700 ind. lr in the Danube
River and its side arms during late spring (BERECZKY 1977, BERECZKY & NOSEK 1993,1994, MATIS &
TIRJAKOVÄ t994b, NOSEK & BERECZKY 1981, 1994, TIRJAKOVÄ 1992); Turiec River (TIRJAKOVÄ
1993); Oka River (SASSUCHIN 1924); 297 (spring), 263 (summer), and 225 (autumn) ind. lr in the be-
tamesosaprobic Volga River (MAMAYEVA 1975); Newa River (SKORIKOW 1905). Rare in small running wa-
ters, also with highest abundances in spring (HEUSS 1976).
Tintinnidiumfluviatile occurs, according to BIERNACKA (1956), HALME (1958), SCHULZ (1965), and VER-
SCHAFFELT (1930), also in oligohaline brackish water; tolerance to salt rather low, however, and none of the
brackish records is documented by sufficient morphological data.. ZHADIN & GERD (1961, cited in HAMMER
1986) found T. fluviatile in Chelar Lake, Russia , at 5.9-6.6 Voo salinity . According to KIVI ( 1 986) common in the
Tvärminne Storfjärden, a brackish-water inlet (4.5-7 Voo salinity) on the northern coast of the Gulf of Finland.
Autecologicat data: Feeds on green algae, diatoms, and flagellates. Clearance rate 1.1-1.9 pl ind.rh-rwhen in-
gesting 1.4-8.4 prm sized wheat starch (KIVI & SETALA 1995). Biomass of 106 specimens 12 mg (SEBESTY-
EN 1958), 20 mg (NEBRAT 1975, MAMAEVA 1919),29 mg (SCHWEIZER 1994),43-50 mg (FOISSNER et
al. t991, NAUWERK 1963, NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991), 194mg (SIME-NGANDO ,& HART-
MANN l99l; very large high indicating misidentification or calculation error). NEBRAT (1975) counted
3303 ind. lt (0.124 mgl') in aRussian reservoir, corresponding to an oxygen consumption of 180prlh-rfor 106
specimens. KUZNETSOVA & ARSLANOVA (1981) found 1430 ind. l-r in a Russian pond during July, with a
monthly biomass-production of aboü 26.4 mg m-3 and an annual production/biomass quotient of 0.293. Genera-
tion time 22.5 h at 20 'C (PETROVA et al. 1976). Eurythermic (PRIMC 1986); BELOVA (1989) found T. .flu-
viatile at 1.2-21.3 oC, and FINDENEGG (1953) observed it in Carinthian lakes at3.8*21 "C throughout the
year, with an optimum between 10-18 "C and a maximum abundance at 13.9 "C; HALME (1958) found highest
numbers between 15 and 20 oC. Autecological data, see Table and Ecogram atTintinnopsis cylindrata.
Table: Autecofogical data of Tintinnidiumfluviatile. Column l, from BERECZKY (1977b; many analyses from Danube River in Hungary);
column 2, from FOISSNER & WILBERT (1919;2 analyses from a eutrophic lake [Obertrumersee] in Salzburg, Austria); columns 3 and 4,
from RECK (1987; many analyses from a eutrophic lake [Plußsee] in Germany; column 4 includes only data for >500 ind. l'r).
Parameters References
.)
1 2 J 4
Temperature ("C) rt-20 n .t-18.5 3.9-t8.2 5-t0.1
pH 7.2-1 .8 8.7-8.9 I .2-9.3 7.7-9.1
Oz (mg I t; Vo) 9-t4 4..1-6.5 0.6- 15 .9: 5-163 1.2-10.7;10-84
BoDs (mg I') 3.6-5.5
NH+*-N (mg 1') 0.t6-0.41 <0.016 0.034-0.35 0.4-0.18
NO: -N (mg l') 0.47 -0.59 0.t6-0.2
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded only from Eurasia. Widely distributed in lentic and large lotic waters.
Euplanktonic, eurythermic (however, possibly preferring 10-20 "C), oligo-euryhaline, and common in all sea-
sons with distinct peak in spring, when phytoplankton, the preferred food, is abundant. Saprobic classification
according to FOISSNER et al. (1991): oligosaprobic to betamesosaprobic (o = 5, b = 5, I = 3, SI = 1.5).
639

Oligotrichida
:rn:r FI
AM F== ryS-tlF=F:aF=:a:l
-T 1 r uu urs iv; .\[uuu 1O 5
CR ii ll ll ili tl it lli il lrrilil[ ]
I
VR 1 +VR2
Tintinnidium
f luviatile
_\
VRZ
r
!-cv
VR1 C
BC.E
uM-
i+"nt
L-M
I
DI
..?j
F,r
(,Jrffi
@ l'r r 6':
9 11
TintinnidiumJluviatile (1, 3, from FOISSNER & WILBERT 1919;2, fiorn KAHL 1932;4,ii'orn FAURE-FREMIET 1924;
5-1 l, from ENTZ 1885. 1, composite from live [body shape, lorica] and protargol-impregnated [ciliary pattem] specimens;
2, 4-ll, in vivo; 3, protargol impregnation). 1,2, 4,7: Ventral and dorsal views,272 pm, 150 pm, 140 pm, ? pm. 3: Dia-
gram of ciliary pattem. 5, L0: Specimens retracted into lorica. 6, 8: Specimens which left lorica and retracted stalk (same
magnification as Fig. 7). 9: Frontal view showing circular adoral zone of membranelles and lorica (outer circle). 11: Very
late stage of division (lorica splitting, see RECK 1988 for details). AM = circular adoral zone of membranelles, BC = buccal
cavity,C=cilia,CV=contractilevacuole,Dl=agglutinateddiatoms,F=fibres,FV=foodvacuole,MA=macronucleus,
MI = micronucleus, MY = myonemes in posterior portion retract cell into lorica, SS = silverline system after dry silver ni-
trate impregnation, ST = stalk, UM = undulating membrane in buccal cavity, VRl,2 = ventral organelles (ciliary rows on
ventral bulge), CR 1-10 = ciliary rows composed ofbasal body pairs.
640



Oligotrichida
Tintinnidium pusillum ENrz, tsos
1909 Tintinnidium pusillumENTZ, Arch. Protistenk., l5: 118 (without illustration).
1929 Tintinnidium pusillumENTZ, Jr. - KOFOID & CAMPBELL, Univ. Calif. Publs Zool.,34: 15 (revision).
1939 Tintinnidium pusillumENTZ - HADA, Trans. Sapporo nat. Hist. Soc., 16: 39 (first illustrations of lorica).
l9l9 Tintinnidium pusillum ENTZ, 1909 - FOISSNER & WILBERT, J. Protozool.,26: 94 (redescription from
life and after silver impregnation; see taxonomy section for size of lorica).
1991 Tintinnidium pusillum ENTZ, 1909 - FOISSNER, BLATTERER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informati-
onsber. Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll9l: 168 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and eco-
logical monograph).
1993 Tintinnidium pusillumENTZ, 1909 - PETZ & FOISSNER, Europ. J. Protistol., 29: lll (morphogenesis).
Taxonomy
Tintinnidium pusillum was overlooked by KAHL (1932), and thus possibly often not separated from -+ T..fluvia-
tile and -+ Tintinnopsis cylindrata by later authors. FOISSNER & WILBERT (1979) mentioned an in vivo lorica
size of 100-150 x25-30 pm. This is distinctly above the values given by other authors, which are below 100 pm
(see character 9). Thus, we reinvestigated FOISSNER & WILBERT's protargol slides and found a range of
10-95 x 24-38 pm, indicating that the values in FOISSNER & WILBERT (1,919) are incorrect or from extreme
specimens and should thus be omitted.
Differential diagnosi
s
l) Body size in vivo about 100 x 20 pm, including the stalk-like cytoplasmic process anchoring cell to lorica;
usually more slender than -+ T. fluviatile .
2) Body cylindrical with posterior portion elongated stalk-like and anchored to lorica bottom (Fig. I, I 1). Un-
derneath ventral anterior end an inconspicuous bulge bearing two short, highly specialized ciliary rows ("ven-
tral organelles"). Cell retracts into or leaves lorica when disturbed (Fig. 13,14, 19,23).
3) Macronucleus ellipsoidal or reniform, near mid-body. Micronucleus ellipsoidal (Fig. l, 2,8,19).
4) Contractile vacuole near anterior end (Fig.2, 19).
5) Cytoplasm colourless, however, cells often colourful due to ingested algae.
6) 9-ll, usually 10 ciliary rows on cylindrical body portion. Rows composed of basal body pairs; anteriormost
pair of each row with 10-15 pm long cilia, remaining pairs with 5-8 pm long bristles emerging from poste-
rior basal body. Two short, oblique ventral ciliary rows (organelles) on bulge underneath adoral zone of
membranelles (Fig. 1, 2, 8-10). Details of ciliary pattem, see Figure 3.
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of l1-13 (16 according to ENTZ) membranelles form-
ing prominent, circular adoral zone; undulating membrane, although rather long, inconspicuous because deep
in buccal cavity (Fig. l-3,1-9,14).
8) Continuously swimming, that is, not jumping and spinning like other oligotrichs.
e) Lorica usually <100x30pm: 48-90 x l8-24pm (inner dimensions; ENTZ 1909), 53-80 x 19-2lpm
(HADA 1939), 53-60 x 16-20 pm (SOUTO 1973), 55-90 x 25-30;rm (mean = J7 x 28 pm, n = 5; Fig. 12,
13,19-22,26; population from the Höglwörther See in Bavaria, identification confirmed by silver impregna-
tion),70-95 x24*38 pm (mean length = 83.5 pm, M = 85 pm, SD = 8.0 pm, SE = 2.1pm, CV =9.6Vo,n=
15; mean width = 29.8pm,M=29 pm, SD = 4.2pm, SE = l.1pm, CV = l4.l pm, n = 15; population of
FOISSNER & WILBERT 1979 reinvestigated, -) taxonomy; silver impregnated specimens, whose lorica is
very likely broadened due to the preparation procedures). RECK (1987) found the following sizes: finished
loricae48-61 x14.5-23pm(mean=57x18.5pm,n=60),unfinishedloricael5-38x16-20pm(mean=33
x 19pm, n=21),loricae ready for division 19-89 x 19-20pm (mean = 83 x20, n = 5). Lorica cylindrical,
642

Oligotrichida
posterior end usually rounded or (rarely) somewhat tapered, consists of a slightly to distinctly brownish sub-
stance to which organic and inorganic debris (xenosomes) agglutinate (Fig. l, 2,4-6, ll-13, 16-26).
Similar species
Identification of live specimens of Tintinnidium and -+ Tintinnopsis is rather difficult because the shape and size
of the lorica depend to a certain extent on season and habitat; thus, unambiguous determination usually requires
silver impregnation of the ciliary pattern, especially in Tintinnidium pusillum and -+ Tintinnopsis c'ylindrata,
which are inseparable in life. --> Tintinnidium.fluviatile andT. pusillumhave a very similar ciliary pattern and are
thus best separated by the size and consistency ofthe lorica: usually distinctly >100 x 30 pm and very soft versus
usually <100 x 30 pm and rather stable.Tintinnidium semiciliatum (STERKI, 1879) KENT, l88l is usually ben-
thic and sessile and has more (12-15, usually 13 or 14) ciliary rows, which are composed of single basal bodies,
except anteriorly (detailed description, see FOISSNER et al. l99l,p. 172).The ciliary rows of -+Tintinnopsis
cylindrata consist also of single basal bodies (see above). -+ Membranic'ola tamari, --> Codonella cratera, and
Stenosemella lacustris FOISSNER & O'DONOGHUE, 1990 (Fig. 1a, b by -+ Codonella cratera) have very
solid loricae, which are broadly cylindrical, amphoriform, or cordiform; furthermore, they have two macronu-
clear nodules and another ciliary pattern. 3 (single macronucleus), 6, 9 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in the plankton of lakes and ponds, rarely in large rivers and attached to
substrates, for instance, exposed slides (FOISSNER & WILBERT 1919). ENTZ (1909) and JACZ,6 (1940)
found I. pusillum in Hungarian fishponds. FOISSNER & WILBERT (1919) counted up to 70000 ind. lr in a
eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Germany during spring and autumn (misidentified as Tintinnopsis cy-
lindrata in WILBERT 1969). KRAINER (1988), who found 3496ind.l-' (=92.3 mgmt) in the surface spring
plankton of a meso- to eutrophic groundwater pond in Styria, Austria, assumes that floating mineral particles
support the development of 7. pusillum. Further records (determination usually based on FOISSNER & WIL-
BERT's paper): eutrophic lakes in Austria and Bavaria (Fig. 12-26); mesotrophic lake (Mondsee) in Austria
(SALBRECHTER & ARNDT 1994); small, meromictic lake in Upper Austria (NAUWERCK 1996); maximum
abundance of 11000 ind. l-r (annual mean 1000 ind. 1r) in a mesotrophic, alkaline lake (Neusiedler See) in east-
em Austria (SCHÖNBERGER 1994); with two peaks in a eutrophic lake (Plußsee) in Germany, viz. during
spring bloom (late March to late May) of diatoms and autotrophic flagellates up to 34 750 ind. l-r with high abun-
dances even at 25 m, and in autumn (late October to early December) with a maximum abundance of
ll150ind.1'r at 5m in November (+ Ecogram; MEIER & RECK 1994, RECK 1987); mesotrophic and
eutrophic to polytrophic Eifel maar lakes in Germany (PACKROFF 1992, PACKROFF & WILBERT l99l); es-
pecially in the winter plankton (up to 3800 ind. 1-r) of a eutrophic lake (Belauer See) in Germany (ZIMMER-
MANN 1994);4075 ind. l-r in the August plankton of Lake Balaton, Hungary (SEBESTYEN 1958); ponds and
lakes in Hungary and the USSR (ALEKPEROV 1982, 1983, 1984a, KREPUSKA 1930, NEBRAT 1980,
ZHARIKOV 1983, 1992,1993); reservoirs in Japan (HADA 1939) and Argentina (SOUTO 1973).
Records from large running waters: mesosaprobic Danube River (BERECZKY & NOSEK 1994) and Volga
River (MAMAEVA 1979). VERSCHAFFELT (1930) found Z. pusillum in various freshwater habitats of the
Netherlands.
Autecological data: Feeds on Rhodomonas, diatoms (Stephanodiscrus), and bacteria (FOISSNER & WILBERT
1979, RECK 1987, VERSCHAFFELT 1930). Maximum size of food particles ingested 8 pm (RECK 1987).
Grazing rates: l0-11 Rhodomonas cellsind.-rh-r and 4-8 Stephanodisurs cellsind.rhr; clearance rates: 11 to
Ihr
24plind.-th-t for Rhodomonas and l34O pl ind. for Stephanodisczs (RECK 1987). Biomass of 106 speci-
mens about 7 mg (SEBESTYEN 1958),40 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1991). FOISSNER & WILBERT (1979) found
high abundances of Z. pusillum only at 9-13 "C, corresponding to the spring temperature of many lakes. Aute-
cological data -+ Table.
643

Oligotrichida
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded only from Eurasia. In lakes and ponds, but according to literature less
common than e.g. --> T. fluviatile, possibly because KAHL (1932) omitted it or because of confusion with other
tintinnids. Euplanktonic, oligo- to meso-stenohaline, rare at temperatures >15 "C, distinct peaks during spring
and autumn, when phytoplankton, the preferred food, is abundant. Saprobic classification according to FOISS-
NER et al. (1991): betamesosaprobic (b = 8, a = 2,I = 4, SI = 2.2).
Table: Autecological data of Tintinnidium pusillum. Column 1, from FOISSNER & WILBERT (19'79; many analyses from a eutrophic
pond [Poppelsdorfer Weiher] in Germany); columns 2 and 3, from RECK (1987; many analyses from a eutrophic lake [Plußsee] in
Germany; column 3 includes only data for >500 ind. I r).
Parameters References
1 2 -J,1
Temperature ("C) 8.1-16.4 3.9-16.4 4.2-9.0
pH 1.4-8.9 t .3-9.0 7 .3-8.9
o, (mg I') t.4-21 0.7 -13 6-t3
Oz (saturation 7o) 6-t12 46-tt2
COz (mg I') 0-23.4
PO+3 -P (mg I ') 0-0.4
NH+*-N (-g l') 0-t.1 0.03-1.4 0.05-0.3
NO:--N (mg 1') 2.5-1 .2
NOz -N (mg 1') 0-0.1
1
Bacteria m1-' (x 10u; direct count) 2-r9.1
(T 'ie )fe I MARZ APRIL AUG. STPT. DEZ.
I
l3
15
2J
25
Tdm. pusillum lnd./l 6 4=999 @ 1000-J900 @+OoO-7SOO @lrOOO-rSooO
in Germany.
644

Oligotrichida
AM- Er = Er =r = ryrw =t Et = ElEl
CR-4. 1 ,,,rn)ütr,iuuur 10 -5
Irnntlltl:lnnlil
r-
I
VR 1 +VR2
-.'.trj,, Tintinnidium
i,/ ty' rl-,, pusillum
i7"" r'
irk,
BC
UM
CS
IM
6
Tintinni.ilium pusillum (1, 3,7, fiom FOISSNER & WILBERT 1979; 2, tiom FOISSNER et al. l99l;4, 5, from HADA
1939; 6, from MAMAEYA 1979. l, 2, composite from live [body shape, lorica] and protargol-impregnated [ciliary pattern]
specimens; 3,7, protargol impregnation;44, in vivo). L, 2: Ventral and dorsal view, length of lorica in protargol slides
70-95 pm (+ taxonomy). 3: Diagram of ciliary pattem. 4, 5: Loricae with rounded (4) and slightly tapered (5) posterior end,
85 pm, 55 pm. 6: Contracted specimen in anterior portion of lorica. 7: Frontal view of oral apparatus. AM = circular adoral
zone of membranelles, BC = buccal cavity, C = cilia, CR = ciliaU rows, CS = cytostome, CV = contractile vacuole, F = fi-
bres, FV = food vacuoles containing diatoms, IM = slightly elongated, inner (buccal) adoral membranelles, IP = irregularly
shaped (mineral?) particles, the dominant type of xenosomes of the lorica, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, MIN =
mineral particles, PB = peristomial bottom, SS = silverline system after dry silver nitrate impregnation, ST = stalk, that is, a
thin, cytoplasmic process anchoring the cell in the lorica, UM = undulating membrane in buccal cavity, VR1,2 = ventral or-
ganelles (ventral ciliary rows), 1-10 = ciliary rows composed of basal body pairs.
645

Oligotrichida
$P*""
s
:§ß
Tintinnidium pusillum \8-10, tiom FOISSNER & WILBERT 1919; II, tiom FOISSNER et al. l99l; 12, l-j, originals of a population li'onr
a lake [Höglwörther See] in Bavaria. 8-10, protargol impregnation; ll, 12, in vivo differential interference contrast; 13, methylene blue
stain). 8-10: Ciliary pattem ofright and left side. For details, see cha-racter 6. Arrows denote the rather long undulating membrane, which is
inconspicuous in vivo because it is deep in the buccal cavity. 11: Extended specimen anchored to the bottom of the lorica by a long, stalk-
like cytoplasmic process (arrows). 12, 13: Empty lorica unstained and after methylene blue stain; the lorica and the agglutinated diatom frus-
tules are heavily stained, indicating that they are covered by an organic film (mucus?). AM = circular adoral zone ofmembranelles, CS = cy-
tostome, FV = food vacuole with diatoms, IM = slightly elongated, inner (buccal) adoral membranelles, MA = macronucleus, ST = remnant
of stalk.VRl.2=ventral organelles(specializedciiiaryrows). t-10=ciliaryrowscomposedolbasal bodypairs.
646

O ligot rich ida
-sT
ts
17 18
DI
\
5 26
'l'irttinnopsis pusillum 114 18, 23 25, origrnals trorn a population o1' a lake [Wallersee] in Austria; 19-22, 26, oli-rlinals fi'om a population of
alake[HöglwörtherSee]inBavaria. l4-l'7,19,20,23,24,invivo;l8,2l,22,25,26,methylenebluestains). 14, 15:Specir-nenwhichleft
the lorica just betbre the micrographs (two focal planes) were taken. The arrow marks the retracted peristomial bottom, which performs a
pumping movement. 16-18: Debris-covered lorica in Normarski differential interference contrast (16), bright field (17), and after methylene
blue stain (18). 19-22: Young specimen (full length of lorica not yet reached) in optical section (19, 22) and surface view (20, 21) in differ-
ential interference contrast (19, 20) and after methylene blue stain (21,22). Asterisk in (19) marks macronucleus, anowhead denotes a myo-
neme (contractile fibre), which retracts the cell into the lorica. 23-25: Same specimen in optical section (23, 25) and surface view oflorica
(24; mainly covered with diatom frustules) in differential interference contrast (23, 24) and after methylene blue stain (25). 26:, Lorica
mainly covered with debris. AM = adoral zone of membranelles, CV = contractile vacuole, DI = diatom frustules, ST = stalk.
611

-Oligotrichida
Tintinnopsis cylindrata KOFOID & CAMPBE,LL, 1929
1892 Tintinnopsis cylindrica DADAY, Term6szetr. Fiz., 15:201.
l9O9 Tintinnopsis cylindrica DADAY - ENTZ, Math. naturwiss. Ber. Ung.,25:204 (first reviser).
1909 Tintinnopsis fusiformis DADAY - ENTZ, Math. naturwiss. Ber. Ung.,25: 204 (revision and synonymiza-
tion of T. cylindrata andT. Jusifurmis).
1929 Tintinnopsis cylindrata KOFOID & CAMPBELL, Univ. Calif. Publs Zool.,34: 33 (revision; see nomen-
clature and taxonomy).
1932 TintinnopsiscylindraraKOFOID-CAMPBELL,1892-KAHL,TierweltDtl.,25i517(revision).
1919 Tintinnopsis cylindrara DADAY, 1892 - FOISSNER & WILBERT, J. Protozool .,26: 97 (authoritative re-
description from life and after silver impregnation).
1991 Tintinnopsis cylindraraKOFOID & CAMPBELL, 1929 - FOISSNER, BLATTERER, BERGER & KOH-
MANN, Informationsber. Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll9l:. 118 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is,
taxonomic and ecological monograph).
1993 Tintinnopsis cylindt'ara KOFOID & CAMPBELL, 1929 - PETZ & FOISSNER, Europ. J. Protistol., 29:
107 (morphogenesis).
Nomenclature and t axonomy
KOFOID & CAMPBELL (1929) raised Tintinnopsis davidffi var. cylindrica DADAY, 1887 to species rank,
and the present species (T . cylindrica DADAY, I 892) thus needed a replacement name (T . cylindrata). Tintinnop-
sis cylindrata is well-known due to the detailed redescription by FOISSNER & WILBERT (1979). Several, very
similar species have been described from freshwater, for example,T. illinoisensis HEMPEL, 1898 (Fig. 8, 10, l1)
from rivers and lakes in the USA andT. wrayi WAILES, 1938 (Fig. 12) from an English lake. These and other
species, for instance from Lake Baikal (see GAJEWSKAJA 1933), are distinguished by small differences in shape
and size of the lorica. Since they not yet have been confirmed by silver impregnation, we consider them as species
indeterminata or synonyms of T. cylindrata and --> Codonella cratera, respectively. Others are obviously testate
amoebae, for example, Tintinnopsis amphora POLLINGHER & KIMOR, 196l from Lake Kinneret. Tintinnopsis
cylindrata inWILBERT (1969)is-+Tintinnidiumpusillum (FOISSNER&WILBERT 1979).
Differential diagnosis
I ) Body size in vivo about 95 x 20 pm, including the about 40 p m long stalk-like cytoplasmic process anchor-
ing cell to lorica.
2) Body cylindrical with posterior portion elongated stalk-like and anchored to lorica bottom (Fig. 1). Under-
neath ventral anterior end an inconspicuous bulge bearing two short, highly specialized ciliary rows ("ventral
organelles"). Cell retracts into or leaves lorica when disturbed (Fig. 1, 2).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, ellipsoidal or reniform. Micronucleus ellipsoidal (Fig. l, 2, 14, 16).
1) Contractile vacuole near anterior end (Fig. l, 2).
s) Cytoplasm colourless, however, cells often colourful due to ingested algae.
6) 9-10 ciliary rows on cylindrical body portion. Rows composed of single basal bodies (mean = 4.5 to 14.4, de-
pending on row; n = l0) with 5-8 pm long cilia. Two short, oblique ciliary rows (organelles) on bulge under-
neathadoralzoneof membranelles(Fig. 1,2, 14, 15,36-38).Detailsof ciliarypattern,seeFigure3.
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of 11 membranelles forming prominent, circular adoral
zone, undulating membrane, although rather long, inconspicuous because deep in buccal cavity (Fig. l-3,14,
33, 3s-38).
8) Continuously swimming, that is, not jumping and spinning like other oligotrichs.
618

Oligotrichida
9) Loricausuallyabout90x25 pm:65-90x 27-29pm (mean=80x28pfll,n= 10;FOISSNER&WILBERT
1919), 52-83 x 20-23 plm (mean = 60 x 21 trtm, n = 13; BERNATZKY et al. 1981), 40-50 x 12-15 pm (DA-
DAY I 892), 12-152 x 2840 pm (ENTZ 1909b). RECK ( 1987) found the following sizes: finished loricae
100-120 x 2V22 Um (n = 5), unfinished loricae 40-90 x 18-40pm (n = 20), loricae ready for division
135-140 x 20-25 pm (n = l0). Lorica cylindrical to slightly funnel-shaped, posterior end usually rounded or
(rarely) slightly tapered, consists of a slightly to distinctly brownish substance to which many inorganic and
organic particles (quartz scales, diatom frustules and other organic debris) agglutinate (Fig. 1, 2, 4-6, 18-35).
Similar species
Identification of live specimens of Tintinnopsls and -» Tintinnidium is rather difficult because the shape and size
of the lorica depend to a certain extent on season and habitat; thus, determination requires silver impregnation of
the ciliary pattern, especially in this species, whose lorica is very similar to that of -+ Tintinnidium pusillum.
However, both are clearly different in the ciliary rows, which consist of paired basal bodies in --> Tintinnidium
pusillum and of single basal bodies in Tintinnopsis cylindrata. -+ Tintinnidium ephemeridum has a conical lorica
and two macronuclear nodules (Fig. 13). Tintinnidium semiciliatum (STERKI, 1879) KENT, 1881 is usually
benthic and sessile and has more (12-15, usually 13 or 14) ciliary rows, which are composed of basal body pairs
anteriorly (detailed description, see FOISSNER et al. 1991, p. 172). --> Membranicola tamari, -+ Codonella
cratera, and Stenosemella lacustris FOISSNER & O'DONOGHUE, 1990 (Fig. 1a, b by -+ Codonella cratera)
have very solid loricae, which are broadly cylindrical, amphoriform or cordiform; furthermore, they have two
macronuclear nodules and another ciliary pattern. 3 (single macronucleus), 6, 9 are key characters for identifica-
tion.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in lentic waters, occasionally in large rivers. DADAY (1892) and JAC-
ZO 0940) found, Tintinnopsis cylindrata in Hrngarian fishponds. FOISSNER & WILBERT (1979) and BER-
NATZKY et al. (1981) observed it throughout the year, with a peak during April in a moderately eutrophic
groundwater pond near Salzburg, Austria (Fig. 1-3, 14-21). We found Tintinnopsis cylindrata in the eutrophic
pond at Salzburg University, where it is sometimes the dominant ciliate species (Fig.22-38). Further records
(identifications after 1979 usually based on FOISSNER & WILBERT's paper): mesotrophic lake (Mondsee) in
Austria (SALBRECHTER & ARNDT 1994); maximum abundance of 26000 ind. 1-r (annual mean 4000 ind. 1r)
in a mesotrophic, alkaline lake (Neusiedler See) in eastern Austria (SCHÖNBERGER 1994); betamesosaprobic
waterbodies in Czechoslovakia (MORAVCOVÄ 1977);early in August with up tolO9 ind.l-rat 1-4 m of a
eutrophic lake (Plußsee) in Germany (RECK 1981; -+ Eogram and -+ Table); up to 2188 ind. I I in Lake Balaton
and in ponds of Hungary (KREPUSKA 1930, SEBESTYEN et al. 1951); Ukrainian pond during winter (KO-
VALCHUK & SVINTSOVA 1994); often abundant in ponds, lakes, and reservoirs of Japan and the USSR
(ALEKPEROY 1982,1983,1984a, BELOVA 1994, KRAVCHENKO 1969, KORNIYENKO 1972, KUSANO
1985, MAMAEVA 1913, 1976a, MORDUKHAJ-BOLTOVSKAJA 1965, MYLNIKOVA 1992a, NEBRAT
1980, ZHARIKOV 1992);Lake Donghu in China (GONG 1986).
Records from running waters: Elbe River at Hamburg harbour (BARTSCH & HARTWIG 1984); Danube River
in Hungary (NOSEK & BERECZKY 1981); 426 (spring),216 (summer), and 0 (autumn) ind. l-r in the betameso-
saprobic Volga River (MAMAYEVA 1915); Savannah River (USA) in September (PATRICK et al. 196l; -+
Table).
Autecological data: Feeds on coccal green algae and very likely also on diatoms; according to SKIBBE (1991)
omnivorous. Biomass of 106 specimens 5 mg (NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUCK 1991; very low value indi-
cating misidentification or calculation error), 12 mg (SKIBBE 1991),20mg (FOISSNER et al. l99l),30 mg
(NEBRAT 1975). NEBRAT (1975) counted 350 ind. I I (0.02 mg I') in a Russian reservoir, corresponding to an
oxygenconsumptionof 25lplh-'for106specimens.BELOVA(1989)found7. cylindrataat10-23"C.Aute-
cological data -+ Table.
619

Oligotrichida
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded only from Eurasia. Common in ponds, lakes, and reservoirs. Euplank-
tonic, oligo-stenohaline, eurythermic (however, possibly preferring temperatures >15 'C), distinct peaks during
spring, when phytoplankton, the preferred food, is abundant. Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et
al. (1991): betamesosaprobic (b =J, a=3,I= 4, SI = 2.3).
Table: Autecological data of Tintinnopsis cylindrata. Column 1, from PATRICK et al. (1967; mtrny analyses fiom the Savannah River,
USA); columns 2 and 3, from RECK (1987; many analyses from a eutrophic lake [Pluf3see] in Gennany; column 3 includes only data at
>500 ind. lr); colurnn 4, from SKIBBE, (1991; several analyses from a hypertrophic lake [Heiligensee] in Germany).
Parameters References
I 2 J1 1
Temperature ('C) 23-28 15.5- t7 .3 16.9 7 .6-2t.2
pH 6.5-t .0 8.s-9.3 9.2 7.2-8.8
o, (mg 1 ') >5-7 2.9-15.9 tt.7 0
O: (saturation 7o) 29-163 120 <lgg
BODs (mg I ') 0.5- l .0
Co: (mg I ') 5-10
PO+3 -P (mg I ') 0.017-0.033
NH+*-N (mg I ') 0.009-0.03 r 0.045-0.05 5 <2.9
NO: -N (mg I ') 0.07 -0.2 <0.3 I
NOz -N (mg I ') 0.00 I -<0.007 <0.116
Cl (mg lr) 5-10
' NH,-N.
lic{e
h)
I
J
5
7
1\
I
xxo
r1
!x
fx
1J
15 lx x
11
19
71
2J
(t)
TFMPTRATUn
25
Tdm. fluviotile lnd./1 O <100 @ 120-2oo @ 400-zoo @ ltoo-t620
Tps. clindroto lnd./1 (p >20 @ roo-rzo A 700
Tps. locustris lnd./l x =ver. O 3-5 o E-ro o l5
Ecogram (from RECK 1987). Temporatl iurcl spatial clistribution ol"l'itttittttoltsis t'vlitttlrutct, -->'l'i rtti rtttitlitutt ./l rtviutilc, iurd --> Codonellcr
cratera (= Tps. lacustris) in the temperature profile of a eutrophic lake (Plußsee) in Germany.
650

Oligotrichida
A cM R- -E aI E-t 5.1 g1 H ffit @ tr= g 91 .F= F ==
I ' = . ;
trrl$rm ?
I
VR 1 +VR2
Tintin n-
opsis
R2- ylindrata
VR1
R
U,l,l?,-M./-/
ffi
r;..-- *r.w,
5
ffi
6
MIN
lffi
DI
Tintinnopsis cylindrata (1, 3, fiom FOISSNER & WILBERT 1919;2, tiom FOISSNER et al. l99l; 4,5, fiom KAHL 1932
redrawn from ENTZ 1909b1' 6, 9, from DADAY 1892. l, 2, composites from live [body shape, lorica] and protargol-
impregnated [ciliary pattem] specimens; 3, protargol imiiregnation; 4-6,9, in vivo). 1,2, 4,5: Ventral and dorsal views,
97 pm,97 pm, 50 pm, 70 pm. 3: Diagram of ciliary pattem. 6, 9: Loricae of type population (6; 45 pm) and of T. fusifurmis
(9; 40 pm), possibly a junior synonym of T. cylindrata. AM = circular adoral zone of membranelles, BC = buccal cavity, C
=cilia,CR=ciliaryrows,CV=contractilevacuole,Dl=diatoms,F=fibres,FV=foodvacuole, IM=slightlyelongated,
inner (buccal) adoral membranelles, IP = irregularly shaped (mineral?) particles, the dominant type of xenosomes used for
lorica building, L = lorica, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, MIN = mineral particles, SS = silverline system after
dry silver nitrate impregnation, ST = stalk, that is, a thin, cytoplasmic process anchoring the cell to the lorica, VRl,2 = ven-
tral organelles (specialized ciliary rows) on bulge undemeath adoral zone of membranelles, l-10 = ciliary rows composed of
single basal bodies.
Tintinnopsis illinoisensis (8, 10, 11, from HEMPEL 1898), possibly a synonym of T. cylindrata. Loricae about 60 pm long.
Tintinnopsis wrayi (72, from WAILES 1938), possibly a synonym of T. cylindrata. Lorica (about 50 prm) with extended
specimen.
Tintinnidium ephemeridum (7, from MAMAEVA 1979;13, from HILLIARD 1968). Lorica about 150pm 1ong. Very
likely a valid species because ofthe two macronuclear nodules and the obconical lorica; see detailed description on p. 636.
651

Oligotrichida
Tintinnopsis cylindrata (14, 15, 17, 18, tiom FOISSNER & WILBERT 19791' 16,20, fiom FOISSNER et al. l99l; 19,21, fiom BER-
NATZKY et al. 1981; 22,23,originals. 14-17, silver impregnation;18-22, scanning micrographs; 23, methylene blue stain). 14, 15: Right
and left lateral view showing, inter alia, ventral organelles on bulge (arrow) and undulating membrane (arrowhead). 1.6: Nuclear apparatus.
17: Fine-meshed silverline system. 18-23: The lorica ofT. cylindrata is rather stable and composed ofmineral particles. It stains, however,
distinctly with methylene blue (23), but less strongly than the cell, indicating that it is covered with a thin layer of organic material. Contrary
to the old literature, we did not observe distinct differences in the staining property of the loricae of T. cylindrata, --> Tintinnidium pusillum,
and -+ Codonella cratera. Thus, we removed this character from the diagnoses. AM = adoral zone ofmembranelles, DI = diatom frustules,
MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, MIN = mineral particles, 1-10 = ciliary rows consisting of single basal bodies.
652

Oligotrichida
29 30
84
Tintinnopsis cylind.rata (originals o1'a population fi'or.n the eutrophic pond at Salzburg Ulriversity. 24-31, in vivo bright
field micrographs;32, in vivo Normarski differential interference contrast micrograph; 33,34, scanning electron micro-
graphs). 24-32: Inhabited loricae showing variability of shape (25,28,31) and surface (24,26,29,30). The lorica of Tintin-
nopsis cylindralc is rather stable, cylindrical, posteriorly rounded or tapered; and consists of a slightly to distinctly brownish
substance to which organic and inorganic particles (xenosomes) agglutinate. The specimen in (31; arrow) is leaving the lor-
ica. The lorica in (32) has been slightly flattened to show details more clearly. Arrow marks dying inhabitant. 33; 34: Inhab-
ited and deserted lorica in anterior polar view. AM = adoral zone of membranelles, IP = irregularly shaped (mineral) parti-
cles.
653

Oligotrichida
Tintinnopsis cylindrata (35-38, original scanning electron micrographs of a population fiom the pond at Salzburg Univer-
sity, Austria). 35: Total view of an inhabited lorica. The arrowhead denotes the anterior end of the lorica. 36-38: Left and
right lateral views showing the inconspicuous, shortened somatic ciliary rows, which consist of single, short cilia. The ven-
tral organelles are on a lobelike protrusion and have long cilia (cp. Fig. 3). The adoral membranelles are very conspicuous
and each outermost cilium is obliquely spread (arrowheads in 37). AM = circular adoral zone of membranelles, CR = ciliary
rows, DI = diatom frustules, VR = ventral organelles, l, l0 = ciliary rows (cp. Fig. l, 3).
654

Heterotrichida
Lino stomella vortic ella @HRENBERG, r 833) AESCHT nov. nom. nov. comb.
1833 Bursaria vorticella EHRENBERG, Abh. dt. Akad. Wiss. Berl., year 1833: 237 (without illustration).
1838 Bursaria vorticella EHRENBERG, 1833 - EHRENBERG, Infusionsthierchen, p. 326 (first illustrations).
1870 Condylostoma stagnale WRZESNIOWSKI, Z. wiss. Zool.,20: 487 , 489 (synonym).
1922 Condylostoma vorticella (EHRENB.) DUJARDIN l84l - PENARD, Etudes Infusoires, p. 201 (redescrip-
tion from life).
1932 Condylostoma (Bursaria) vorticella (EHRENBERG, 1833) - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl.,25i 457 (revision).
1933 Condylostoma vortit:ella (EHRENBERG) DUJARDIN 1841 - WANG & NIE, Contr. biol. Lab. Sci. Soc.
China, l0: 45 (redescription from life).
1970 Condylostoma vorticella (EHRENBERG, 1833) - DRAGESCO, Annls Fac. Sci. Univ. f6d. Cameroun
(Num6ro Hors-s6rie): 95 (silver impregnation).
1974 Condylostoma yorticella (EHRENBERG) - PATSCH, Arb. Inst. landw. Zool. Bienenkd., 1: 48 (silver
impregnation).
1991 Condylostoma vorticella (EHRENBERG, 1838) - PACKROFF & WILBERT, Arch. Protistenk., 140: 132
(redescription from life and after silver impregnation).
1992 Linostoma vorticella (EHRENBERG, 1833) JANKOWSKI, 1978 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOH-
MANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192: 390 ("Ciliate-At1as",
that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
Linostoma JANKOWSKI, 1978 is a homonym, discovered by E. AESCHT (pers. comm.); she replaced it by
Linostomella nov. nom. For nomenclatural purposes the replacement name and the species have to be cited as
"Linostomella AESCHT in FOISSNER, BERGER & SCHAUMBURG, 1999" and "Linostomella vorticella
(EHRENBERG, 1833) AESCHT in FOISSNER, BERGER & SCHAUMBURG, 1999".
Linostomella is still monotypic and differs from Condylostoma by the lack of apical (frontal) cirri (membra-
nelles). Such cirri are characteristic for marine species, but very likely also occur in some freshwater and soil
condylostomids, for example, in Condylostoma teticola FOISSNER, 1995. Possibly, some of the poorly de-
scribed freshwater condylostomids mentioned below (section on similar species) belong to Linostomella.
Dilterenl ial diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 100-210 x 70-160 pm, usually around 150 x 100 pm; Salzburg population 100-150 x
80-100 pm (Fig. t5-32).
2) Body saccular to ellipsoidal, both ends broadly rounded (Fig. 1, 3*9, ll, 15, l1); ventral anterior half
obliquely truncated, lateral view thus oviform to pyriform (Fig. 10, 16, 18, 19).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, moniliform, composed of 2-15, usually 6-10 globular or ellipsoidal nodules
(Fig. 1, 3,6, t3,2s).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end, with bulbous collecting canals extending to anterior body half (Fig. 5, 17).
5) Cortical granules colourless, about I pm across, form distinct stripes between ciliary rows (Fig. 3 , 21).
6) 26-45, usually 30-34 longitudinal to slightly spirally arranged ciliary rows (Fig. 2, 3, 12, 11 , 2O-23).
7) Oral apparatus conspicuous, occupies anterior ventral half of cell, consists of question-mark shaped adoral
zone of membranelles terminating near mid-body and conspicuous undulating membrane at right margin of
buccal cavity. About 40-50 membranelles (only 19-22 according to TUFFRAU 1968 and DRAGESCO
1970; different species? misobservation?). Peristomial bottom not ciliated but striated by very long microtu-
bulearrays(oralribs)originatingfromundulatingmembrane(Fig. 1,2,11,12,11,18,20,22-24,29,30).
8) Restless, swims slowly to moderately rapidly.
655

Heterotrichida
Similar species
Traditionally, Linostomella vorticella was classified with the genus Condylostoma, which, however, has apical
cirri (-+ list of synonyms and taxonomy). Several Linostomella vorticella-llke condylostomids have been de-
scribed from freshwater or saline inland waters: Condylostoma tardum PENARD, 1922 (180-250 pm) has only 3
macronuclear nodules; Condylostoma caudatum LAUTERBORN, 1908 is longish and posteriorly tapered; Con-
dylostoma luteum KAHL, 1932 is more slender and has only 2 macronuclear nodules; Condylostoma nigra
DRAGESCO, 1960 is slightly larger (180-300 pm) and has blue cortical granules (llke Stentor coeruleus); Con-
dylostoma vorax YILLENEUVE-BRACHON, 1940 is distinctly larger (250400 pm); Condylostoma kasymovi
ALEKPEROV, 1984b is longer (240-280;rm), posteriorly tapered, and has more macronuclear nodules (15-17)
and ciliary rows (65-70; like the C. yorticella population studied by GELEI 1954); Condylostoma terricola
FOISSNER, 1995 has apical cirri and thus is a true Condylostoma, is usually more slender than L. vorticella,has
distinctly fewer ciliary rows (15-18), and the macronuclear beads are longitudinally arranged. Climacostomum
virens (EHRENBERG, 1838) STEIN, 1859 lives benthically, is usually green due to symbiotic algae, and has a
vermiform macronucleus (detailed description, see FOISSNER et al. 1992c,p.394). Easily confused with -+
Bursaridium pseudobursaria (single reniform macronucleus) and contracted -+ Stentor spp. (usually blue, red or
black by distinct pigment granules), especially S. muelleri, which, however, usually does not occur in plankton.
-+ Pelagotrichidiumfaurei, ahypotrich, also has a very similar size and shape but possesses two widely sepa-
rated macronuclear beads and conspicuous cirri. 1,2,3,5 (cortical granules colourless, no symbiotic algae),7 are
key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Common in plankton of ponds and lakes, sometimes benthic, occasionally in
small and large running waters and reservoirs, rare in inundated soils (FOISSNER 1998). EHRENBERG (1833,
1 838) discovered L. yorticella in fire-btckets in Berlin, Germany, together with Gonium pectorale. Locus classi-
cus of the synonym, Condylostoma stagnale, is Warsaw, Poland, where WRZESNIOWSKI ( I 870) discovered it
in a polluted Lemna pond with an offensive hydrogen sulphide smell. Further records substantiated by illustra-
tions: eutrophic ponds in Germany (PATSCH 1974) and Austria (Fig. 15_32); during winter and spring in a eu-
to polytrophic lake (Meerfelder Maar) in Germany (PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991); over the year with high
and low abundances in eutrophic ponds of Hungary (GELEI 1954); frequent in winter plankton of ponds in
Nanking, China (WANG & NIE 1933); abundant in clear ponds of Cameroon (DRAGESCO 1970). Records not
substantiated by illustrations: with low abundance in a mesotrophic alpine lake (Piburger See) in Austria (SCH-
LOTT-IDL 1984); groundwater ponds in Austria (KRAINER 1988); littoral of an oligotrophic lake (Attersee) in
Upper Austria (BRUNNTHALER et al. l90l); in a Czech pond from late June to late July (SVEC 1897); meso-
trophic lake (Heiliges Meer) and humid Sphagnum in Germany (MÜCKE 1979); dtring spring (up to
l0 000 ind. I r), early summer, and autumn in the plankton of a eutrophic pond in Germany (WILBERT 1969);
mainly during spring in the euphotic zone of a eutrophic lake (Plußsee) in Germany (RECK 1987; -+ Table);
infusions from frozen mud of ponds and ditches (BÜTSCHLI 1876); highly polluted sites of Hamburg Harbour,
Germany (BARTSCH & HARTWIG 1984, HECKMAN et al. 1990); rice-field in Italy (MADONI 1987, 1988);
especially during spring and autumn in ephemeral meadow puddles of Czechoslovakia (MATIS 1966); Ukrainian
pond during winter (KOVALCHUK & SVINTSOVA 1994); lakes, reservoirs, and fishponds in the USSR (for
example, ALEKPEROY 1982, 1984a, KRAVCHENKO 1969, MAMAEVA 1979, MIRABDULLAEV 1988,
NEBRAT 1980); during autumn in Lake Donghu, China (GONG 1986); foul water pond in Japan (MURA-
MATSU 1957); Reelfoot Lake, Tennessee, USA (BEVEL 1938); a|25" C in a small, muddy, turbid pool at
piped spring in Virginia (BOVEE 1960); small eutrophic pond in Toronto, Canada (JACKSON & BERGER
1984); Costa Rica (RUIZ 1961);Uruguay (CORDERO 1922) and Madagascar (SONDHEIM 1929).
Also in small and large running waters, for example, lowland brooks in Germany (HEUSS 1976), Rhine River
(SCHMITZ 1986), side-branch of Danube River in Hungary (BERECZKY 1991), Volga River (BELIKHOFF
1936), Pripyat River near the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant (NEBRAT 1992), Lielupe River, Latvia (LIEPA
1973), and in the seston of an alphamesosaprobic section of the River tr-yna, Poland (HUL 1987).
656

Heterotrichida
Autecological data: Feeds on autotrophic and heterotrophic flagellates (Euglena gracilis, Chlamydomonas rein-
hardtii, Chilomonas paramaecium, Eudorina, Pandorina), diatoms, ciliates (Tetrahymena pyriformis, nassulids),
and organic debris (for example, GELEI 1954, LIYEPA 1984a, WANG & NIE 1933). Biomass of 106 speci-
mens 416 mg (JACKSON & BERGER 1984; average from 28 Bouin-fixed cells), about 1560 mg (OLEKSIV
1985), about 1000 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1992c, NESTERENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991). JACKSON &
BERGER (1985a, b) estimated an average growth rate of 0.03 h I at22" C and a mean 50 7o survival time of 6 d;
Linostomella vorticella was observed to encyst, usually when stock cultures were old, food was probably
depleted, and ciliate density was high. Oxygen consumption of 106 specimens about 5.6 ml h-r at 20" C (OLEK-
SIV 1985). BELOVA (1989) found I. vorticella between 14.4 and22" C.
Table: Autecological data of Linostomella vorticella. Column 1, from BICK & KUNZE (1971; unknown number of unpublished analyses
by WILBERT); column 2, from DETCHEV A (1979a; many analyses from Bulgarian running waters); column 3, from RECK (1987; many
analyses from a eutrophic lake [Plußsee] in Germany); column 4, from ZIMMERMANN (1989; many analyses from a lake [Piburger See] in
Austria).
Parameters References
.)
1 2 J 4
Temperature (" C) 2-t9 10 5.2-9.4 4.2-5.8
pH 7 .4-9.3 1.4-8.2 8.0-8.2 6.8-l .r
o, (mg I') 0.2-38 9.6-t2.0 10.9- t4.0 0.1-7 .5
Oz (saturation vo) 1.8-360 98-100 86-122
NH+*-N (mg 1') 0-3. 0-0.23 0.04-0.05 0r0.2t
1
l')
NO: -N (mg 0.t4-3.84
Ecological summary: Recorded from Eurasia, South America, and Africa. Common in plankton of small and
large, lentic and lotic water bodies. Sometimes very abundant, but without distinct preference of season, trophy,
and diet (omnivorous). Oligo-euryhaline and eurythermic. Resting cysts known. Saprobic classification accord-
ing to FOISSNER et al. (1992c): betamesosaprobic to alphamesosaprobic (o = 1, b = 6,a=3,I = 3, SI =2.2).
Linostomellavorticella (1,2, Ii'onrPACKROT'F&WlLtsERl l99l:.1. li'onrWRZESNIOWSKI 1t370. l.3.invivot2.protar-lol impregna-
tion). 1, 3: Ventral views, 150 pm, 145 pm. 2: Ciliary pattern of ventral side, 150 pm. AM = adoral zone of membranelles, CR = ciliary
rows composed of basal body pairs, CV = contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuole, MA = macronucleus, UM = undulating membrane.
651

Heterotrichida
-CP
UM
I
Linostomella vorticella (4, fiom EHRENBERG 1838; 5, 8-10, 14, from PENARD 1922; 6, from WANG & NIE 1933; 7,
from KAHL 1932; ll, from FAURE-FREMIET 1924; 12, from PATSCH 1974; 13, from DRAGESCO 1970. 4_11, 14, in
vivo;12, 13, composites from live and protargol-impregnated specimens). 4-8, 11: Ventral views, up to 230 pm,200 pm,
180 pm, 180 pm, 132pm.9, 10: Dorsal and left lateral view. 12,13; Ciliary pattem of ventral side, 140 pm. 14:bral appa-
ratus. A = ingested algae, AM = adoral zone of membranelles, CC = collecting canal of contractile vacuole, CP = cytopyge,
CR = ciliary rows, CV = contractile vacuole, DI = ingested diatoms, MA = moniliform macronucleus, PB = peristomial bor
tom, UM = undulating membrane.
658

Heterotrichida
AM
ri,.:i #
it,: i:;,, ,.
::: ::::.1 :lll:l:
,,l1lr'.1;,,"tt ""'
FV
'17
Linostomella vorticella (originals of a population from the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria. l5-19, in vivo
bright field micrographs; 20. 21, scanning electron micrographs). 15, 16: Typical appearance of freely motile specimens in
ventral and ventrolateral view. 17: Ventral view showing posterior end of oral apparatus (oral vertex, arrow), slightly spi-
rally arranged ciliary rows (arrowheads), and bulbous dilation of left collecting canal of contractile vacuole (asterisk). Note
dark colour due to many food vacuoles (cp. Fig. 31). 18, 19: Ventrolateral and right lateral view showing ovate shape and
oblique truncation of anterior body half. 20r 21: Yentral and dorsal view. The large, flabby peristomial bottom is not ciliated,
but finely striated due to conspicuous oral ribs (microtubular lamellae originating from basal bodies of undulating
membrane; cp. Figures 29,30,32). The ciliary rows consist of basal body pairs (Fig. 2), only one body of which is,
however, ciliated. AM = adoral zone of membranelles, FV = food vacuoles, PB = peristomial bottom, UM = undulating
membrane.
659

Heterotrichida
I
R AM
23
.tü
tü
:*
,::t* : l**, : f,A
:' ,,, *:4
(: * ;;" *:4' | *., ,,,; .l ,ttt **'*
:::::::
,
,,ü,
,, :.*.:r),itttt: W)j"'.,o,,,,.,, 25
'*" :$ *
"t' ::..):!*::
*
W; e ,& W
*'!i:;l *
o *
,urr, .il.#t:l
,,L,.t',rfi',,,,tt:'':!:,,
i:i'*,,:1 *; g:i::.i ::: :l :r :t:)::
'w,,,
4,
*
'*"1' +
i;,::,:äi::..i&;
';:';:ZW';:;::!{,,1}.'#1Tji:"",'.:li:l::',;"j"j:::it,ophic po,d ar sarzburg Univcrsiry. Ausrria 22-2,J,p,.u,,,.-ou,
*i.;:,l:il11T;:':'T:':1.:,,i.ri'.'lil.':r- o",ri' ",ä;ffiJ:i#ä:ä,;::lä 3i;il;i,'lJ;'1,,*#;,;:::i::
'0, 'ä'
i:W7:';:ä[1Tä"iXlä.T*l?ii:,:::,:*::::':*:,:":tr1üi1#:j::,,::"il;Jä;:i::i:';"'ä:1iläH:11,7
fm fa i:c lr :o änu l:c .le 1u is :c ,Ton is :i 's :t :i :n :s io 1f I T2 1h 1ea '^ds *) .. oi. :r "\a u" ," .- ,l, ., ,, "^ y,,. ^; L. ^; -,; ,,; _; ,,obJ, ä;;;#"*,1; Tä: ,: ":, ä:_ T J :." T',# f ;f :i Jf Ji: :f' if lf :i 'ff il: ;::i,,*:,#
l : - , :
lffi';?;jjfflli;;:i::*::,:*",:i"::t',1i;;ffi ffi:ää"jiTä;:ffix"i:.,]'"T.l".;ilii".:*T:',il'J]#I
rorm macronucreus, pB = perisromiar botrom with r;;;;;r;ä;"ö;ä, ü,i::ilff,Iäil:lLf ='t" MA = monili-
660

Heterotrichida
Linostomella vorticella (originals of a population tl'or.r.r the eutrophic pond at Salzburg Ur.riversity. 29, 30, 32, scannir.rg electron
micrographs; 31, in vivo differential interference contrast).29: Frontal view showing huge oral apparatus. Arrows mark undulating mem-
brane. Note striated peristomial bottom. 30, 32: Details of peristomial bottom which is covered by conspicuous oral ribs (microtubular
lamellae originating from basal bodies of undulating membrane) between which are numerous fusiform organelles (arrows) of unknown
function (possibly mechano- or chemoreceptors). 31: Posterior portion of squeezed specimen showing lacunes ofcontractile vacuole, a mac-
ronuclear nodule, food vacuoles, and cortical granules (arrow). AM = adoral zone of membranelles, CC = collecting canal of contractile
vacuole, CG = extruded cortical granule, FV = food vacuoles, MA = macronuclear nodule, OR = oral ribs, PB = peristomial bottom.
66t

Heterotrichida
Genus Stentor oKEN, lsls
Basically, stentors are sessile ciliates. However, some are mainly planktonic, and most of the sessile species can
abundant in the pelagial, if they occur in great numbers on certain substrates, e. g., submersed macrophytes.
FOISSNER & WOLFL (1994) recognized 19 valid species, of which the two euplanktonic forms, Stentor eme-
thystinus and Stentor auracanus, were included in this book. For the other species, the reader is referred to
FOISSNER et al. (1992) and the following key, which has been reproduced from FOISSNER & WÖLFL (1994).
The key uses simple features easily recognizable with an ordinary light microscope in unstained cells, that is, sil-
ver impregnation is not necessary (but useful). For a correct identification it is, however, essential to study live
cells because the colour of the cortical granules may change in specimens fixed with formalin or other chemicals.
Shape and macronuclear features used are explained in Figures l-8 on next page.
1 Withsymbioticgreenalgae ............2
- Withoutsymbioticgreenalgae ..........7
2 Corticalgranulescolourless.Cellsappeargreen,brownishorwhitishatlowmagnificationandtothenakedeye.... ......3
- Cortical granules pigmented. Cells appear black, blue, purplish red, brown or red-orange at low magnification and to the naked eye . . 4
3 Macronucleus moniliform, usually consisting of>10 connected beads forming a pearl necklace-like figure. Slenderly trumpershaped and
up to 2 mm long when fully extended. Very likely cosmopolitic and mainly in freshwater S. polymorphus
- Macronucleus consists of two (rarely one, three, four or five) isolated beads. Broadly trumpet-shaped and up to 700 pm long when fully
extended. Known from freshwaters of North America and Mexico , . . . . S. pyriJormis
4 (2) Macronucleus vermiform to slightly nodular. Cortical granules blue-green. Broadly vase to trumpet-shaped, 100-230 x 80-130 pm.
Known from South America only; probably euplanktonic . . . -+ S. auracanus (p.671)
Macronucleus consists ofone or several isolated beads . ... . . ..r. . .. . .. 5
Usually one (rarelyuptofive) sphericaltoellipsoidalmacronuclearbead ........ 6
Usually two (rarely three) isolated macronuclear beads. Cortical granules purplish red. Broadly trumpet-shaped, about 320 x 140 trrm.
Recorded from India (Bangalore) and Africa (Kenya) . . S. tartari
6 Cortical granules lilac or amethystine or purplish red, surround also micronuclei. Broadly trumpet-shaped, 250-500 pm (rarely up to
800 pm) long when fully extended. Known from freshwaters of Europe, North America, Australia and tropical Africa (Cameroons) . . . .
-+ S. amethystinus (p.664)
- Cortical granules yellowish brown, brownish or red-orange, do not sumound micronuclei. Broadly to slenderly trumpet-shaped and
200-300 prm long when fully extended. About l0 70 of specimens have 2-5 macronuclear beads. Known from freshwaters of North
America, Japan and tropical Africa (Gabon) . . . . S. fuliginosus
7 (l) Cortical granules colourless. Cells appear brownish, yellowish or whitish at low magnification and to the naked eye . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
- Cortical granules pigmented. Cells appear dark, bluish, greenish, reddish or brownish at low magnification and to the naked eye . . . . 13
I Macronucleusmoniliformorvermiform ......:. ..........9
- Macronucleusasinglebead .. .........12
9 Macronucleusdistinctlymoniliform .....10
- Macronucleusvermiformornodular ....:... ....11
l0 l0-20 macronuclear beads. Stenderly trumpet-shaped and 500-1000 trrm (rarely up to 3 mm) long when fully extended. Mainly in fresh-
water, but also in estuaries. Recorded from Eurasia . . . S. muelleri
- 3042 macronuclear beads. Broadly trumpet-shaped and 450-1000 pm long when fully extended, posterior end elongated tail like.
Knownfromtropicalfreshwatersonly(Cameroon) ...... .... S.caudatus
11 (9) Peristomial bottom of usual structure. Macronucleus vermiform (in contracted cells more or less distinctly coiled and nodular). Slen-
derly trumpet-shaped and 500-l200pm (rarely up to 3mm) long when fully extended. Very likely cosmopolitic and mainly in
freshwater ... S.roeselii
- Peristomial bottom bilobate, that is, with two small wings. Macronucleus nodular. Slenderly trumpet-shaped, 1000x l80pm in size
when fully extended. Anchored with long (up to 500 pm), cord-like tail at base of conspicuous, cylindrical lorica. Known from European
riversonly ... S.barretti
12 (8) Macronuclear bead conspicuously large, 45-62ytm, surrounded by 52-142 tiny (about I pm) micronuclei. Broadly trumpershaped
and 500-900 pm long when fully extended. Known from tropical Africa (Cameroons and Butare, Central Africa; J. DRAGESCO, pers.
comm.)only ....... S. multimicronucleatus
- Macronuclear bead <40 pm in diameter, possibly only one (or few) micronucleus. Slenderly trumpet-shaped and 200-1300 pm long
when fully extended. Known from central and eastem Europe freshwaters only .. . . S. elegans
13 (7)Withoutsymbioticalgae. Corticalgranulespigmented. Macronucleusmoniliformorvermiform ........... 14
- Macronucleusasinglebead ........... 17
14 Macronucleusmoniliform ....15
- Macronucleus vermiform. Cortical granules dark green. Slenderly trumpet-shaped,625-1150x140-240pm when fully extended.
Known from type location only, namely a small freshwater stream inNew Zealand S.loricatus
662

Heterotrichida
15 Usually 4-6 macronuclear beads. Attached to crustaceans of Lake Baikal. Cortical granules sea green. Distinctly club-shaped,
175 350 pm long . . . . S. baicalius
- 6-38(usually>10)macronuclearbeads.Corticalgranulesblue-green.Usuallynotattachedtoanimals. .......16
16 Slenderly trumpetshaped, usually 1000-2000 pm (up to 4 mm) long. Very likely cosmopolitic and mainly in freshwater S. coeruleus
- Broadly trumpet-shaped, about 450 pm when fully extended. Adoral zone of membranelles not only contractible (as usua[), but also
retractable, so that when resting or irritated the anterior end of the cell is conspicuously recessed and surrounded by a border of recurved
ectoplasm somewhat scalloped. Known from type locality, an impounded freshwater goose pond on the eastern shore of Willapa Bay in
the southwest corner of the state of Washington, and from an estuary in Alabama S. introversus
17 ( I 3) Macronucleus a single bead. Cortical granules not pink or red . . . . 18
- Macronucleus a single bead. Cortical granules pink or brick red. Slenderly trumpet-shaped and 200-500 pm (usually about 250 pm) long
when fully extended. Very likely cosmopolitic and mainly in freshwater . . . S. igneus
18 Macronucleus a single bead. Cortical granules azure to sea green. Slenderly trumpet-shaped and 10G400 pm (usually about 250 pm)
long when fully extended. Freshwater, marine and even terrestrial biotopes. Very likely cosmopolitic S. multifurmis
- Macronucleus a single bead. Cortical granules rusty brown to brownish. Cells appear yellowish, brownish or blackish to the naked eye
and at low magnification. Broadly trumpet-shaped and 200 350 pm long when fully extended. Reliably recorded from European fresh-
waters only S. niger
.u\
Ss--
t\ Irilil
6
vermiform nodular
.\--.--
mon ili single b ead
'4*',,
':_,. J " Shape and macronucleus types in Stentor (trom
'jr
FOISSNER & WÖLFL 1994). 1: Large, slenderly
trumpet-shaped species with a moniliform and a ver-
miform macronucleus, respectively. 2: Freely
motile, turbinate specimen with coloured pigment
t-a stripes. 3: Small to medium-sized, broadly trumpet-
p61-t'g_$fl:- shaped species with single, spherical macronucleus.
4: Campanulate species. 5-8: Macronucleus types.
663

Heterotrichida
Stentor amethystiztts LETDY, 1880
1880 Stentor amethystinus LEIDY, Proc. Acad. nat. Sci. Philad., year 1880: 157 (without illustration).
1922 Stentor niger EHRENBERG 1838 - PENARD, Etudes Infusoires, p. 210 (misidentification; redescription
from life).
1932 Stentor amethystinws LEIDY, 1880 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl. ,25: 165 (revision).
l9l0 Stentot" ctmethystinus LEIDY, 1880 - DRAGESCO, Annls Fac. Sci. Univ. f6d. Cameroun (Num6ro Hors-
s6rie) : 77 (authoritative redescription from life and after silver impregnation).
1980 Stentor amethystinus LEIDY, 1880 - FOISSNER, Ber. Nat.-Med. Ver. Salzburg, 5:91 (redescription from
life and after silver impregnation).
1986 Stentor amethystinus LEIDY - NILSSON, Biol. Skr., 27: 8 (electron microscopic comparison with S.
adreseni, ajunior synonym of S. tartari).
1986 Stentor amethystinus LEIDY, 1880 - DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNSIS, Faune tropicale, 26:403
(silver impregnation; revision of African species; possibly, their S. niger also belongs to S . amethystinus).
l99l Stentor amethystinus - SCHNEIDER, Mikrokosmos, 80: 193 (excellent in vivo micrographs).
7992 Stentor amethystinus LEIDY, 1880 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte des
Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192: 339 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecological
monograph).
1994 Stentor amethystinus LEIDY, 1880 - FOISSNER Ar WÖ1ru, J. Plankton Res., l6: 264 (revision).
1998 Stentor amethystinus LEIDY, 1880 - HEEP, ROHOZINSKI, SIMPSON & PATTERSON, Rec. Aust.
Mus., 50: 211 (illustrated record from Australia).
Taxonomy
Stentor amethystinus has symbiotic green algae and violet or purplish red pigment granules. Stentor niger (MÜL-
LER, 1773) EHRENBERG, 1831, which is similar to S. amethystinus,lacks symbiotic green algae and has
brownish pigment granules making cells blackish to the naked eye and at low magnification (<x100). Thus, the
zoochlorellae-bearing Stentor niger populations studied, for example, by BEAVER & CRISMAN (1989a, b),
PENARD (1922) and ROUX (1901), belong to S. amethystinus. Stentor niger is a bona fide but rare species,
which was recently re-discovered in Austria (M. KREUTZ, pers. inform.). Distinguishing these two species is
important because they very likely have a rather different ecology. STEIN (1867) mixed S. amethystinus with S.
igneusEHRENBERG, 1838, which has a reddish pigmentation and lacks zoochlorellae.
FOISSNER (1980a) underestimated the number of ciliary rows. A reinvestigation (FOISSNER et al. 1992a) pro-
vided values matching those of the authoritative redescription by DRAGESCO (1970).
Differential diagnosis
Important note: Often very abundant, appearing as dark dots to the naked eye due to the violet pigmentation.
Stentor is essentially sessile and trumpet-shaped. However, S. amethystinus and related "dark" species (for exam-
ple, S.fuliginosus, ) S. araucanus) are usually free-swimming and turbinate (Fig. 1, 2,8,9,12,21).
1) Length of extended specimens in vivo 250-500 pm, according to LEIDY (1880) up to 840 pm long (mean =
600 x 180 pm when extended and attached; 21M20 pm when swimming);distinctly (up to two thirds) con-
tractile (Fig. 8, 9).
2) Attached specimens broadly to slenderly trumpet-shaped (Fig. 1, 6, 8, 12), swimming cells turbinate to globu-
lar (Fig. 2, 7, 9, 14, 2l).
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, globular, surrounded by many (>20) tiny micronuclei covered with pigment
granules (Fig. I, 11,23).
4) Contractile vacuole near anterior end on left wall of buccal cavity (Fig. I , 6, 12, 22).
664.

Heterotrichida
s) Cells appear as dark dots to the naked eye, specimens with few pigment granules greenish due to symbiotic
algae (Fig. 12, 15,21,22). Cytoplasm green due to many 4-7 pm sized spherical to ellipsoidal symbiotic
algae close under pigment layer (LEIDY interpreted them as food; Fig. 4,13,22). Cortical (pigment) gran-
ules amethystine, that is, violet or purplish red, in vivo 0.5-0.8 llm across, form conspicuous stripes between
ciliary rows; granules also in cytoplasm and around micronuclei (Fig. 3, 4, ll, 16,22,23).
6) 90-l l0longitudinal ciliary rows, in vivo stand out as white lines between broad pigment stripes (Fig. l, 3, 5,
10, 15, 11, 18,22). PENARD (1922) described hair-like setae ("sensory bristles").
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of very prominent, counter-clockwise spiralling adoral
zone of membranelles accompanied by long but inconspicuous undulating membrane. About 200-300 adoral
membranelles and2C_i25 (up ro 50 according to DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS 1986) semicircular
ciliary rows on peristomial bottom (Fig. l, 5, 10, 14, 16, 17 ,20-22).
8) Swims rather fast by rotation about main body axis. Can attach to natural and artificial substrates.
Similar species
Difficult to separate from Stentor fuliginosus FORBES, 1891, which has, except around the micronuclei, yellow-
)
brown, brownish or red-orange-coloured pigment granules. Stentor araucanus has a vermiform macronucleus
and blue-green cortical granules. Stentor tartari NARAYANA MURTHY & KASTURI BAI, 1974, the senior
synonym of S. andreseni NILSSON, 1986, usually has two macronuclear nodules. Stentor zuger' 1MÜLLER,
1773) lacks symbiotic algae and has brownish pigment granules (see taxonomy section and FOISSNER et al.
1992c, p.355). 3 and 5 are key characters for identification. A key to all Stentor species is found on page 662.
I
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Very common in lake and pond plankton; not yet recorded from running waters.
LEIDY (1880) discovered S. amethystinus in a pond near Woodbury, New Jersey, USA. We found it several
times in bathing lakes and fishponds of Austria as well as in reservoirs and dammed rivers of Australia (see also
HEEP et al. 1998); sometimes, numbers were so high that water appeared dark. SCHNEIDER (1991, 1998)
observed masses of S. amethystinus,especially during December and January and March and April, in a clean
headwater pond (soft-water, 4.0-1 .5" C, pH 5.3) of Germany Fig. 2l-23); in betamesosaprobic groundwater
ponds, abundances were lower. BEAVER & CRISMAN (1989a, b) observed S. amethystinrzs (as S. niger with
zoochlorellae; see taxonomy section) in acidic, oligotrophic lakes of Florida, usually in spring and summer,
where it contributed an average of 64 Vo of total ciliate biomass; occasionally they found it in mesotrophic and
hypertrophic lakes. In McCloud Lake, a small (5 ha), oligotrophic, acidic @H 4.7) water body in the northern
part of central Florida, S. amethystinus had an annual mean abundance of 2400 ind. I I and usually comprised >90
Eo of totalr ciliate and 3l Vo of zooplankton biomass. The estimated contribution of endosymbionts to the total
autotrophic biomass in McCloud Lake was 3O 7o, and ranged from2 7o to 85 7o (mean23 7o) in those Florida
systems where it was found. Summer and autumn blooms in McCloud Lake occurred in metalimnetic plates, and
cell densities were often high enough to significantly decrease water transparency (BIENERT et al. 1991; -+
Ecogram 1). Further records: very common in the temperate, oligotrophic Lake Stechlin, Germany (SCHÖN-
BORN 1985); dystrophic lakes in Germany (STRÜDER-KYPKE 1996); lakes in Bulgaria (DETCHEVA 1972);
abundant in a rice paddy in Laos during August and September and in moderate numbers during October and
December (HECKMAN 1914); rare in water bodies of Louisiana (BAMFORTH 1963); eutrophic lake in
Quebec, Canada (PUYTORAC et al. 1912); abundant at 6o C and pH 6.3 in tundra ponds of Point Barrow region,
Alaska (SULLIVAN 1957); during late summer up to about 400 ind. lr in Patagonian lakes (WÖLFL 1996; -+
Ecogram 2 and Ecograms l-3 by -+ S. araucanus); often very abundant in the Cameroons and Uganda
(DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS I 986).
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria, autotrophic flagellates, filiform algae, and diatoms. Biomass of 106 speci-
mens about 4000 mg according to FOISSNER et al. (1992c) and 983 mg according to WÖLpL (1996), a low
value, possibly from poorly fixed specimens. Volume-specific filtration rates 0.4-2.0 x 104 h-r (2.2 and 6.2 pm
sized particles) and 0.5-1.0 x 103 h | (0.8-1.2 pm sized particles; for details, see WÖLFL 1996). Number of sym-
66s

Heterotrichida
bionts during winter higher (2040-3800 per cell) than during stratification (1100*2200 per cell; WÖLFL 1996).
FOISSNER (1980a) and FOISSNER et al. (1982) found S. amethystinus twice with very high abundance in a
eutrophic, dystrophic alpine pond of Austria at 5.6*17" C, pH 4.9-5.0, 8.3-9.0 mg l-r Oz (100-1 16 7o santration),
2.2mg l-r COza*, 0.32-0.4 mmol l-r total hardness,44-52 mg l-r KMnO4-consumption,O.23z-0.47 mg l-r NH+*-N,
0 mg l-r NOz--N, 0.02-0.04 mg I'' POa3--P, 0 mg l-r HzS. Positive phototactic (BARBIER et al. 1956, SCHNEI-
DER 1991, TUFFRAU 1965).
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Eurasia, Africa, and Australia. Euplanktonic and often very abun-
dant in oligotrophic to hypertrophic lakes and ponds, including dystrophic waters. May cause serious problems in
waterworks. The presence of symbiotic algae indicates that S. amethystinlzs can sustain periods of low food sup-
ply. Positively phototactic due to pigment granules and/or symbiotic algae. Saprobic classification according to
FOISSNER et al. (1992c): betamesosaprobic (o = 2,b = 6, a = 2,I = 3, SI = 2.0).
CV
SS
89 M
CP t? *-a/
b"r
4
CR
l_e
M
'11
Stentor amethystinus (l-5, from FOISSNER 1980a; 6, 8-l l, from DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS 1986; 7, fiom
KAHL 1932. 14,6-9, 11, in vivo; 5, 10, protargol impregnation). 1, 6, 8: Slightly contracted and fully extended (8) speci-
mens, 370 pm, 330 pm, ? pm. 2,7,9: Detached, freely motile, contracted specimens, 140 pm, 300 pm, ? pm. 3, 4: Cortex
with pigment granules and symbiotic green algae in surface (3) and lateral (4) view. 5, 10: Ciliary pattern of ventral side.
The truncated anterior end is encircled by about 200-300 adoral membranelles forming a conspicuous ribbon. Note that Fig-
ure 5 is schematized, showing only part of the ciliary rows (-+ taxonomy). 11: Nuclear apparatus. The globular macronu-
cleus is surrounded by pigment granules (arrow) and many small micronuclei, which are also embedded in pigment granules.
AM = prominent adoral zone of membranelles, CG = amethystine cortical (pigment) granules, CP = cytopyge, CR = ciliary
rows, CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus, MI = miclonuclei, PB = peristomial bottom, SA = symbiotic green
algae, SS = fine meshed silverline system after Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation, UM = undulating membrane.
666

Heterotrichida
Ecogram I (from BIENERT et al. 1991). Seasonetl
abundances of -+ Limnostrontbidium yiride and Sten-
trtt' niger' (= S. umatltystitlts, see taxonomy section) in 00o
McCloude Lake (Florida). xr 40
Stentor amethystinus (12, from FOISSNER 1980a;
T1-
13-16, from FOISSNER et al. 1992c. 12-16, in vivo). 20
0)
12: Slightly contracted specimens attached to debris.
Note dark colour due to the violet pigmentation. 13: = 60
o
Symbiotic algae. 14,, 15: Sli-qhtly squeezed,, contracted C Strombidium viride
specimens. 16: Anterior end showing peristornial bot- 4C
torn with curved ciliary rows standing out as white lines
from broad stripes of cortical granules. AM - counter- 20
clockwise spiralling (seen from cell's outside) adoral
zone of rnembranelles, CV = contractile vacuole, SA =
syrnbiotic alsae.
Nffi§§
661

Heterotrichida
5OO ind l-1
depth [mJ
o Ecogram 2 (from WÖt-pt- 1996). Vertical distribution of .!.
I ( umethystinus (white) and -+ ,S. araucanus (black) in Lake
10 ! Pirehueico (southern Chile) during l99l 11992.
20
30
40
50
M M
-,ffi
or'.:1 ..#.11,. ,»ti'
;i:,:':,:,,"t'';:7:.:.:.;::.:.i..'1'%.:.;:,:f::f:.i , t.,\ff.i:::+:,ii,:::.
. t:::- li t: _' .: . .' a ..! l .*' t .' ll w: j.t w-j itt ril. tt t. t: :: jl : x: !, :: :. r4 17 !* -' :l.W :s., :,- ü\.. +A,- rt. \l:ii :rtr :,, H.- il+& ! 'a- "j 1 ,- .J t
T,'",u,,%1 .., '*,n,
äo
"r;;r;;nt;" '
same specimen. The somatic ciliature consists ofabout 100 nanowly spaced ciliary rows, whereas the oral ciliature is composed ofabout 250
compound organelles (membranelles), forming a conspicuous ribbon. 19: Posterior pola.r area showing circular field (arrow) of closely spaced
basal bodies whose cilia anchor the cell to the substrate. 20: Anterior region showing distal (arrowhead) and proximal end (BC) of adoral zone
ofmembranelles. The undulating membrane is inconspicuous, that is, consists ofa row ofbasal bodies. AM = adoral zone ofmembranelles,
BC = buccal cavity, CR = ciliary rows, MA = macronucleus, PB = peristomial bottom, SA = symbiotic algae, UM = undulating membrane.
668

Heterotrichida
::: /.til
li:iil:
mark entrance to buccal cavity. To the naked eye and at low magnification ((100x), S. amethystinus appears black due to innumerable violet
pigment granules. AM = adoral zone of membranelles.
669



Heterotrichida
Stentor arüucanus FoISSNER & wöLFL, r9g4
1994 Stentor araucanus FOISSNER & WÖLFL, J. Plankton Res., 16:280.
Differential diagnosis
Important note: Often very abundant and occurring together with S. amethystinus in South American lakes,
both appearing as dark dots to the naked eye due to the intense pigmentation. Stentor is basically sessile and
trumpet-shaped. However , S. araucanus very likely'lacks a sessile stage because it did not colonize artificial sub-
strates in the laboratory.
l) Size in vivo about 100-270 x 80-200 pm, usually around 230 x 130 pm, starving cells became considerably
smaller, that is, about 100-150 x 80 pm. Only slightly contractile.
2) Slenderly to broadly turbinate (inverse conical; Fig. 1, 3-5,1,13, l4).
3) Macronucleus usually in middle third of cell, not covered by pigment granules, vermiform to slightly nodular,
10-15 pm across; shape highly variable, often horseshoe-like (Fig. 1, 2,17).Many micronuclei (Fig. 2).
4) Contractile vacuole near anterior end on left wall of buccal cavity, with collecting canal extending posteriorly
(Fig. l).
5) Cells appear as dark dots to the naked eye, and bluish green in dissecting microscope (Fig. 7). Cytoplasm
green due to many symbiotic algae of Chlorella type, that is, having green, cup-shaped chloroplast; symbi-
onts spherical to slightly ellipsoidal, 3-8 pm (usually 4-6 pm) across, size and number (580-2300 per cili-
ate) depending on season (Fig. l, 6, ll,12, 15). Cortical granules conspicuously blue-green, very similar to
those of S. coeruleus, in vivo 0.8-1.2 pm across, form conspicuous stripes between ciliary rows (Fig.6,9,
16).
6) 6OJ I (mean = 66; t = 19) longitudinal ciliary rows, in vivo stand out as white lines between broad pigment
stripes (Fig. 1,8-10).
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior end of cell, consists of very prominent, counter-clockwise spiralling adoral
zone of membranelles accompanied by long but inconspicuous undulating membrane. About 150 adoral
membranelles and 8-15 (mean = 10.5; n = l6) semicircular ciliary rows on peristomial bottom (Fig. l, 8).
8) Swims rather slowly, that is, aboü 2-3 times its length per second, by clockwise rotation (viewed from ante-
rior pole) about main axis. Never attached to walls and natural sediment, that is, presumably euplanktonic.
Similar species
Easily identified by the following character combination: cortical granules blue-green, symbiotic green algae pre-
sent, macronucleus vermiform to slightly nodular. Stentor multiformis (MÜLLER. 1786) and S. coeruleus (PAL-
LAS, 1766), which also have blue-green cortical granules, Iack symbiotic algae and have an ellipsoidal macronu-
cleus, respectively, 6-38 macronuclear beads (detailed descriptions, see FOISSNER et al. 1992c). -+ Stentor
amethystinus has violet cortical granules and a globular macronucleus. 3 and 5 are key characters for identifica-
tion. A key to all Stentor species is found onpage662.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Preferentially in spring and the euphotic zone from 5 to 10 m. FOISSNER &
WÖLFL (1994) discovered S. araucanus in the pelagial of Lake Pirehueico, South Chile, a 30 km2 sized (maxi-
mum depth 145 m), warm-temperate, oligotrophic andine lake 586 m above sea-level. Abundance was usually
higher in the coastal area than in the lake centre. It occurred also in several other (ultra)-oligotrophic Araucanian
and Patagonian lakes in southem Chile and Argentina (Lake Galletue, Villarica, Maihue, Rupanco, Llanguihue,
Nahuel Huapi, Gutilrrez, Moreno, Vintter), and occasionally in sewage-contaminated coastal bays of Lake
67 I

Heterotrichida
Nahuel Huapi; however, the numbers in polluted areas never exceeded the maximum number found in the clean
lake centre, indicating that S. araucanus does not react positively to nutrient increase. Furthermore, THOMAS-
SON (1963) and MODENUTTI (1988) observed "an abundance of black dots, i.e. Stentor specimens with a posi-
tive phototropism in the vials" in many northem Patagonian lakes; very likely, these were S. araucanus speci-
mens. DADAY (1902) and LÖpfLgR (1961) reported mass occurrences of Stentor coeruleus in some of the
lakes mentioned above, strongly indicating that it was also S. araucanus. However, it cannot be excluded that at
least some of these records relate to -s S. amethystinus,which was found several times coinhabiting the same
lakes as S. araucanus (-+ Ecograms l-3, and Ecogram 2by S. amethystinus; more detailed ecological data, see
WÖLFL 1996). Recently, MODENUTTI (1997) and MODENUTTI et al. (1993) observed S. araucanus in
oligotrophic lowland lakes in the North Andean Patagonian region (-+ Ecogram 4a); it was absent in high alti-
tude lakes and in small lakes with higher dissolved organic matter content.
Autecological data: In nature, probably feeds on various algae; in the laboratory, ingestion of long bacterial rods
was observed. Volume-specific filtration rates 0.42.0 x lOa h-r (2.2 arrd 6.2 ,pm sized particles; details, see
WÖLFL 1996). Number of symbionts during winter higher (1540-1850 per cell) than during stratification (580 to
1050 per cell; WÖLFL 1996). Biomass of 106 specimens about 1200 mg. FOISSNER & WÖLFL (1994) provided
the following autecological data: l-:772 ind.l-r,0-50 m, 6.5-20" C (annual ranges), pH 6.8-8.4,7.5-12.2mgla
Oz. Further data -+ Table. WÖLFL (1996) estimated a maximal assimilation rate of 32O2OOO pg C ind.-r h-r.
Ecological summary: Possibly
restricted to South America, or
at least to Gondwanan areas,
n because a similar species has
o.naumanni
ll never been reported from the
I'o 450 l: L4 E^ S.ameth avstinus much better studied Laurasia.
*E=EJ
C ffi Very likely, S. nraucanus pre-
o o 3m rtr*tü S.araucanus fers, or at least tolerates,
C
ro o nutrient-poor conditions, possi-
g
f, 150 bly using its symbiotic algae or
-oo
their metabolic products as an
2m0 r--r additional energy source.
f] crustaceans
ctr ffi roüfers
.E 15m
tl ffi o.na umanni
(r, I stcnar
1m
E a I nemror. ciliaues
a (o ffi Hrur
E 5m
.o
-o
0 1m
50 o/o
0
1e0 30
Ecograms 1-3 (from WÖLFL 1996).
cü-
1: Cumulative abundance of symbiotic
tE l BO algae bearing ciliates (-+ Ophrydium
E E'] o/o naumanni, ) Stentor amethystinus, S.
@a araucanus) in Lake Pirehueico. 2:
o Cumulative area-specific biomass of
E
o zooplankton groups and percentage of
E
symbiotic algae-bearing ciliates. 3:
Biomass of endosymbionts (bars) and
percentage of total autotrophic bio-
mass. All data calculated for 0-25 m
ASONDJFMAMJ
depth.
672

Heterotrichida
Table: Autecological data for Stentor araucanus and-+ Ophrydium naumanni from oligotrophic lakes in the North Andean Patagonian
region (fiom MODENUTTI 1991). Altura = sea level, Srp - surface area, Prof - depth, Cl a - chlorophyll a, PTD - total dissolved phos-
phorus. MP = not expluinec'I. MOD - clissolvecl organic nratter. Kd PAR = lisht uttcltuatiolr coeff icient.
r,go Alhrra §ry Ptof (Ia* PIDI MP* MOD* I«PAR3 Optuy&un Statt
msrt.rrl Km' m pgt' p&t' -gl-' -gJ-' m't naommi @utctüttts
IAGOI\üAHUELHUAPT 7& 557 M
NH BLBST 0.10 Ly| 0.60 0.v+ 0.1.5 pneurte auseilte
NHBAI{I{LDPFZ, 0.45 3.8L a.25 0.41 0.1:l pneurte preserfie
NHBLESTFRIAS 0.00 3.n n.a n.a 0.68 ausente ar§erfe
NHffi 0.1.0 Ln 0.u2 0.4 O.LZ peserüe p,resente
TAGOI\{ASCARDI D6 39 218
I\4ASCARDI (P. SUry 00. .m n 3.u L.A 0.44 0.25 pmesente presente
L4 0.68 0.D,
IVIASCARDI (P.FDT) 0.36 pmeseflte presente
IVIASCARDI (CAT) 0.30 L45 0.n 038 0.L2 pmesente pnesente
IAGOMOREIVO OESIE 7& 6 rlLa. 0.50 5.12 0.39 0.6 0.L4 pnreserrte presente
IAGOMORENOESIE 7& 6 n.a 0.25 3.D 0.w 0.65 0.L6 pnewrte presente
IAGOCORRENTOSO 7& 0.m LTI 0.11 0.?5 0.10 pnewrte presente
IAGOW 780 L6 111 0.n L35 0.1"8 0.32 0.12 prresente pnesente
IAGOffi 107 0.40 L6 0.38 0.16
82ß 5 0.41 presente pnesente
TAGOCAI{TARC 850 0.5 L2 0.L0 L.% 0.?ß 0.72 0.?ß ar:sente ausente
IAGOTREBOL 7& 0.3 12 0.90 4"ß 0.01 Ln 0.38 ausente arserrte
TAGOW 7& 0.06 g 0.n 3.» 0.71 L6 0.6 arsente arrsente
IAGO \1ERDE 16m 0.m 5 Ln 4.90 5.% L.B 0.50 ausente ausente
TAGOTOIWK m18m 0.L L2 0.n L.N 0.58 4.49 0.L6 ausente a[§ente
I.AC,o SCHIvfCLL I1.a n.a 0.30 L.15 0.42 0.38 0.L5 ausente axerte
a
9
12 12
15 15
18
A !
\E./21 21
ö
824 24ä
27e
§27 I ltl
d
1eO0 o§)
- -T- r'T-T-TI-rl-rT
b=3 3:
63
tl-LAo
24
6 g
27 E § § fi ä E E §
*oöülEsEq3E
s p i P
6I E § E .g E#
§§s E
Esö E
Ecogram 4: Vertical distribution of Stentor arducanus (a; bar = 100 ind. I r.1 aucl -+ Ophrydium naumanni (b; bar = 800 ind. Ir) in oligo-
trophic lakes of the North Andean Patagonian region (from MODENUTTI 1997).
6t3

Heterotrichida
AM
e<
U
N
m'
[\
6
Stentor araucanus (fiom FOISSNBR A WÖlfl 1994. 1,3-6, in vivo;2, DAPI stained). 1: Right lateral view of a repre-
sentative, freely motile specimen,215 trrm.2: Variability of nuclear apparatus, bars = 50 pm (detail) and 100 pm (others).
3-5: Dorsal and lateral views of shape variants. 6: Surface view of cortex and cytoplasm showing blue-green, about I trrm
sized cortical granules, ciliary rows, and endosymbiotic green algae. AM = adoral zone composed of about 150 mem-
branelles, CG = cortical granules form broad stripes between ciliary rows (cp. Fig. 8-10), CR = ciliary rows, CV = contrac-
tile vacuole with posteriorly extending collecting canal, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronuclei, SA = symbiotic green
algae.
614

Heterotrichida
I
12
Stentoraraucanus(fiornFOISSNER&WOLFL1994.7,invivo; 8-l2,fbnnalin-fixed).7:Swimmingspecirnen.8, l0:
Anterior and posterior polar view showing striation caused by cortical pigment granules. Clear (white) zones contain ciliary
rows.9: Surface view showing conspicuous stripes ofnarrowly spaced, blue-green granules. I"L: Symbiotic green algae, usu-
ally 4-6 pm across. l2t Optical section showing symbiotic green algae and cortical granules (arrows). AM = adoral zone of
membranelles, PB = peristomial bottom with about 10 curved ciliary rows.
675



Hypotrichia
H y p o trichidium c o nic um LowArsKy, 1 e2 I
l92l Hypotrichidium conicum ILOWAISKY, Rab. volzh. biol. Stat., 6:97, 103.
1932 Hypotrichidium conicum ILOWAISKY , l92l - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl.,25: 555 (first reviser).
1972 Hypotichidium conicum ILOWAISKY, l92l - TUFFRAU, Protistologica, 8: 258 (description of silver-
impregnated specimens).
1975 Hypotrichidium conicum ILOWAISKY, l92I - STILLER, Acta zool. hung., 21: 228 (revision).
1984 Hypotichidium conicum ILOWAISKY , l92l - FLEURY & FRYD-VERSAVEL, Protistologic a, 2O: 535
(authoritative redescription according to silver-impregnated specimens; morphogenesis).
l99l Hypotrichidium conicum ILOWAISKY, l92l - FOISSNER, BLATTERER, BERGER & KOHMANN,
Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, U9l: 218 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is,
taxonomic and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
Several species have been described from this conspicuous and thus easily identified genus and its synonym, Spi-
rofilum GELEI, 1929 (non Spirofilum GELEI, 1944). However, most of them are poorly characterized and even
the best known species, H. conicum an,d H. tisiae (GELEI, 1929), show only small differences not excluding syn-
onymy (-+ similar species). Possibly, only the type species, H. conicum, exists.
Differential diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about 90-120 x 70 pm.
2) Body + pyriform, almost unflattened, posterior end with short cytoplasmic process (Fig. 1, 2,8, 12-15,l8).
3) Two ellipsoidal macronuclear nodules with one micronucleus each (Fig. 1,7-9,1I).
4) Contractile vacuole left of midline at level of buccal vertex (Fig. 1).
5) Cytoplasm brownish-grey or golden, possibly by ingested algae.
6) Right of undulating membranes (-+ character 7) 4 meridional cirral rows with (from left to right) 4-5, 8-10,
7-15, and 17-20 cirn each (Fig. 5, 10, 14). On broadened posterior body portion 6 oblique cirral rows (Fig.
l, 5-8, 1O-13, 15, 18). On dorsal side 3 meridional rows of bristles (Fig. 5, 6,9, 1I,13; not required for iden-
tification).
7) Oral apparatus in left anterior quadrant of cell, qonsists of prominent, question-mark shaped adoral zone of
membranelles and two distinctly curved undulating membranes at right margin of buccal cavity. Adoral zone
about two thirds of body length, consists of about 40-50 membranelles (Fig. 1, 5,7,8,10,12,14, 16-18).
8) Swims slowly by rotation about main body axis.
Similar species
Genus easily identified due to its characteristic shape. Species separation needs silver impregnation (see also tax-
onomy section). Hypotrichidium tisiae has only 5 oblique cirral rows on the posterior body portion, a whitish
cytoplasm, a slightly shorter adoral zone of membranelles, and a more anteriorly located contractile vacuole
(GELEI 1929). Hypotrichidium africanum JANKOWSKI,I9T9 (= H. conicutn sensu DRAGESCO 1970) has a
longer caudal process (Fig. 3, 4). -+ Pelagotrichidium faurei is much larger (in vivo >280 pm long) and broadly
truncated anteriorly. -+ Spiretella plancticola tapers anteriorly and has two almost semicircular marginal cirral
rows and a spiralled adoral zone of membranelles. -+ Pseudostrombidium planctonticum is 120-160 pm long,
lanceolate, and has only 18 cirri on the ventral surface, which is bordered by two meridional marginal cirral
rows. 2, 6 are key characters for identification.
611

Hypotrichia
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Not very common; usually in ponds and puddles, rare in lakes and running waters.
ILOWAISKY (1921) discovered H. conicum in the plankton of ponds near Moscow and Saratow. We found it in
the plankton of the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University (Fig. l0-18). Records substantiated by illustrations: up
to 20 000 ind. lr in road puddles near Erlangen, Germany (DINGFELDER 1962; according to STILLER 1975
another species, viz. H. geleii); pond in France (FLEURY & FRYD-VERSAVEL 1984); water bodies in the
Upper Peninsula of Michigan (LUNDIN & WEST 1963); at2Voo salinity in Mobile Bay, Alabama, during March
(JONES 1974). Records not substantiated by illustrations: puddles in Bulgaria during August and September
(DETCHEVA 1976); castle-moat in Italy in June (CANELLA 1954); floodplain ponds of Tisza River, Hungary
(STILLER 1942a); plankton of ponds and reservoirs in the USSR (KRAVCHENKO 1969, MIRABDULLAEV
1988, OLEKSIV 1985); plankton of eutrophic ponds in Japan (HATANO & WATANABE 1981, KUSANO
1985); Conestoga drainage basin, Pennsylvania, USA (CAIRNS 1965); water bodies in Louisiana, USA (BAM-
FORTH 1963); Lake Chad, Africa (DRAGESCO 1972a). HUL (1987) found 11. conicum with low frequency and
abundance in a mesosaprobic Polish river, and LIEPA (1913, 1978) in Latvian rivers. CURDS & COCKBURN
(1970a, b) and CURDS & FEY (1969) found H. conicum rarely but very abundantly in activated sludge plants,
indicating an effluent BOD range of 2l-30 mg l-r. TIRIAKOVÄ & MATIS (1987) observed it in moisr forest
mosses from Czechoslovakia, indicating that it can make resting cysts; SCORZA & NÜNEZ MONTIEL (1954)
recorded it from infusions of Venezuelan mosses.
Autecological data: Feeds on algae (Chlorogonium sp., desmids), flagellates (Dinobryon, monads) and ciliates,
like -+ Coleps and -+ Halteria (DINGFELDER 1962, FLEURY & FRYD-VERSAVEL 1984, KUSANO 1985).
Biomass of 106 specimens about 150 mg (FOISSNER et al. l99l). MATIS (1915) found 11. conicum in Slovakia,
viz. in a canal extending along a forest at 3-20" C, pH 6.4-7.2, and, 1.5_5.8 mg l-' Oz. MATIS & STRAKOVÄ-
STRIESKOVÄ (tqqt) recorded it from two thermal lakes in Slovakia at 16-27.5'C and pH 6.9.
Ecological summary: Reliably recorded from Eurasia and Africa. Typical for ephemeral, eutrophic and saprobic
lowland water bodies with high densities of flagellates. Probably able to make resting cysts. Eurythermic. Sapro-
bic classification according to FOISSNER et al. ( 1991): beta- to polysaprobic (b = 3, a = 4, p = 3,1= 2, SI = 3.0).
A,^i
,
Hypotrichidium conicum ( I , 2, liorn STILLER 1975, redrawn fiom ILOWAISKY l92l ; in vivo) and llypotrichidium africanum (3, 4, from
DRAGESCO 1970; composite from live and protargol-impregnated specimens). 1, 2: Ventral and lateral view, 90-120 pm. 3, 4: Ciliature of
ventral and dorsal side, 90 pm. AM = adoral zone of membranelles, CR = c-iral rows, CV = contractile vacuole, DR = dorsal ciliary rows, MA
= macronuclear nodule, PR = caudal process.
618

Hypotrichia
/:- - är
_Q (_
Z,e Fi
-- t ,- \
oot\
4 'l ocf. ;l §
rl lr-H
"
t- a t a '\ E
i i n\ \
+
--t\d =
{"\
I
lo tt..^
\ I '..
-ttt,-.-..D... ttttt.l
o ." --\ "';.-.r.r.ir}=ä |
'""....a. -\ao
-Bir.. ..^
1soo, -'o"-r -.o
4OOCooOlo..aa. \...-o^o eoa -tt
ra1
4eoooo
^
,,ttr'oetooo.rf "y
re'Q.o^o )
-/
**.$ffi
,**
s,
#
I
T $ s
Hypotrichidiuttt corticurtt (-5-9, lionr FLEURY & FRYD-VERSAVEL l9tl4; plotargol impre-euation.l. 5,7,8: Ciliature o1'
ventral side. Bar = 20 pm. Numbers denote meridional cirral rows right of undulating membranes. Note oblique arrangement
of cirral rows on posterior body portion. The number of rows separates H. conicum (6) from H. tisiae (5). 6, 9: Ciliature of
dorsal side. Arrow in (8) marks frontal cirral row 3. Bars = 20 pm. AM = adoral zone of membranelles, CR = cirral rows,
DR = dorsal ciliary rows, FC = single frontal cirrus in front of undulating membranes, MA = macronuclear nodule, MI =
micronucleus, PR = caudal process, UM = undulating membranes (endoral and paroral), 1-4 in (5) = frontal cirral rows, 1, 3
in (9) = dorsal ciliary rows.
679

-Hypotrichia
't;'l;'1iäiiu
cR#i
,C...R,.
':':,,,
11
Hypotrichidium conicum ( I 0* I 3, originals of a population fiom the eutrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria. 10, t I ,
protargol impregnation; 12, 13, scanning electron micrographs). This species is easily identified due to its highly characteris-
tic shape and cirral pattern. 10, l2z Oral apparatus and cirral pattern of ventral side. Arrowheads mark outer undulating
membrane 1= paroral) at right margin of deep buccal cavity, arrow denotes inner undulating membrane (= endoral) at bottom
of buccal cavity (cp. Fig. 17). 11, 13: Dorsal ciliature showing cirral rows and dorsal bristle rows (arrows). AM = adoral
zone of membranelles, CR = cirral rows, MA = anterior macronuclear nodule.
680



Hypotrichia
:18
Hypotrichidium conicum (original scannir-rg electron rnicrograph of a specirnen from the eutrophic pond att Salzburg Ljniver-
sity, Austria). 18: Ventrolateral view. For details andlabels, see previous figures.
682

Hypotrich ia
Pelagotrichidium faurei gurrRAU, re72) JANKowsKr, tsiI
197 2 H ypotr"ic hidium Jaurei TUFFRAU, Protistolo gica, 8: 260.
1978 Pelagotichidium J'aurei TUFFRAU - JANKOWSKI, Tezisy Dokl. zool. Inst. Akad. Nauk SSSR, year
1978: 40 (combining author).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
Hypotrichidiumfaurei TUFFRAU, 1970 is a nomen nudum. Monotypic genus, that is only the present species is
known. Redescription recommended.
Differential diagnosis
1) Length in vivo about 280 pm, after protargol impregnation about 175 x 105 pm (Fig. 1).
2) Body bursiform, that is, transversely truncated anteriorly, narrowly rounded posteriorly (Fig. 1).
3) Two ellipsoidal macronuclear nodules and several micronuclei left of midline (Fig. I ).
4) Contractile vacuole not described, probably near mid-body left of midlline, as in other hypotrichs.
5) Cytoplasm without specific features.
6) About 5 meridional, slightly curved cirral rows on ventral surface; anterior end with 7 frontal cirri (Fig. 1,2,
4). Several meridional rows of short bristles on dorsal side (Fig. l; not required for identification).
r
7) Oral apparatus occupies anterior half of cell, consists of very prominent, triangular adoral zone of mem-
branelles and two curved undulating membranes at right margin of huge buccal cavity. Adoral zone about 60
Vo of body length, consists of about 60 membranelles (Fig. 1,4,5).
8) Movement unknown.
Similar species
Easily separated from other hypotrichs by the large size and bursiform shape; however, inexperienced observers
may confuse it with two large and similar shaped colpodids (no cirri but cilia), viz. --> Bursaridium pseudobur-
saria (single, reniform macronucleus) and Bursaria truncatella (single, vermiform macronucleus; detailed
description,seeFOISSNERetal. 1991,p.424).Lrkewise,-)Linostomellavorticella, aheterotrich,issimilar
in size and shape but has a moniliform macronucleus and many fine cilia. --> Hypotrichidium spp. are distinctly
smaller (usually less than 150 pm) and pyriform. --> Spiretella plancticola is <160 pm long and anteriorly
tapered. -+ Pseudostt'ombidium planctonticum is 12V160 pm long, lanceolate, and has only l8 cirri on the
ventraf surface which is bordered by two distinct marginal cirral rows. l, 2, 6 are key characters for identifica-
tion.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: So far only known from type location, that is Yveline near Paris, France, where
TUFFRAU (1912) discovered P..faurei in the pelagial of a large pond in October.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Food not mentioned by TUFFRAU (1912), although he was
able to cultivate this rare organism. Biomass of 106 specimens about 2500 mg (when 280 pm long; our calcula-
tions).
683

Hypotrichia
rC
MI
MA
Pelagotrichidiumfaurei 1ti'orn TUFFRAU 1912. l, composite fionl live and protargol-impregnated specirrens;2-5, protar-
go1 impregnation). 1: Ciliature of ventral side and nuclear apparatus, 175 pm.2: Detail of cirral rows.3: Formation of oral
primordium (new mouth; arrow) commences underneath buccal vertex (arrowhead). 4: Anterior portion of cell showing oral
apparatus, cirral rows, and nuclear apparatus. 5: Undulating membranes. AM = adoral zone of membranelles, C = cilia of
undulating membrane (endoral), CR = cirral rows, DR = dorsal ciliary row, E = endoral (one of the two undulating mem-
branes),F=fibreoriginatingfromcirri,FC=frontalcirri,MA=macronuclearnodules,Ml=micronuclei,P=paroral(one
of the two undulating membranes), UM = undulating membranes (endoral and paroral).
684

Hypotrichia
P s e udo s tro mbidium p lanc to ntic um uoRvÄru, t s::
1933 Pseudostrombidium planctonticum HORVÄTH, Arch. Protistenk., 80: 29.
1935 Urosoma (f;jr Parastrombidium) planctonicum J. HORVATH, 1933 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 841
(incorrect subsequent spelling; see nomenclature).
1972 Parastrombidium planctonicum HORVÄTH, 1933 - BORROR, J. Protozool., 19: l3 (revision; incorrect
subsequent spelling).
19'72 Urosoma (= Parastrombidium) planctonicum (HORVATH 1933), KAHL 1935 - BICK, Binnengewässer,
26: 7 6 (incorrect subsequent spelling).
1986 Oxytricha planctontica (HORVATH, 1933) - WILBERT, Arch. Protistenk., 131: 67 (detailed redescription).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
KAHL (1935) obviously confused Pseudostrombidium HORVÄTH, 1933 with Parastombidium FATJRE-
FREMIET, 1924, an oligotrich. Many incor:rect subsequent spellings (see also above): Oxytricha planctonica
(WILBERT 1986a, p. 67), Urosoma planctonica (STILLER 1974, p. 115, 116), Urosoma planctonicum (WIL-
BERT 1969, p. 458), Urosoma planctonisurz (LEPSI 1965, p. 915), Viosoma planctonicurz (DRAGESCO 1910,
p. 129). Pseudostrombidium is monotypic, that is, includes only the type species. BORROR (1912) synonymized
P. planctonticum with [lrosoma acuminata (STOKES. 1887a) BÜTSCHLI, 1889, a benthic species, which has
four macronuclear nodules and only three caudal cirri (FOISSNER 1982, BERGER & FOISSNER 1987).
Differential diagnosis
l) Length in vivo 120*160 pm on average (HORVATH 1933), after protargol impregnation 195-265 x 65-110
pm (WILBERT 1986a).
2) Body slenderly to broadly obovoid to cuneate, that is, anterior end broadly, posterior narrowly rounded or
tapered; anterior ventral half flattened, dorsal side distinctly vaulted (Fig. 1-7, 9, 13).
3) Two ellipsoidal macronuclear nodules in midline of cell, usually with 1 micronucleus each (Fig. I , 9 , 12-14).
4) Contractile vacuole on left body margin in mid-body (Fig. 1,9).
5) Cytoplasm colourless, according to HORVÄTH (1933) with symbiotic green algae; however, confusion with
ingested green algae cannot be excluded.
6) On ventral surface 18 fronto-ventral-transverse cirri and two meridional marginal (one left, one right) cirral
rows (Fig. 1, 9, I l). On convex dorsal side 6 meridional rows of short bristles (recognizable only after silver
impregnation; not required for identification), three of which give rise to 3-8 caudal cirri each, forming con-
spicuous tuft at posterior end (Fig.2, 10, 12-14).
7) Oral apparatus in left anterior quadrant of cell, consists of prominent, question-mark shaped adoral zone of
membranelles and two almost straight undulating membranes side by side at right margin of buccal cavity.
Adoral zone 45*50 Vo of body length, consists of about 48-55 membranelles (Fig. I , 9, I 1, 1 3).
8) Swims slowly by rotation about main body axis, continuously moving up and down with adoral zone invaria-
bly directed upward.
Similar species
Easily identified by the large size and sparse ciliature. The other euplanktonic hypotrichs (-+ Hypotric'hidium, -+
Pelagotrichidium, -+ Spiretella) have several spiralled cirral rows. Pseudostrombidium planctonticum should not
be confused with species of the Stylonychia mytilus complex (detailed description, see FOISSNER et al. 1991, p.
3 l5 and BERGER 1999, p. 504), which occur occasionally in the pelagial but usually have a broad posterior end
from which only three very conspicuous caudal cirri arise; furthermore, the cirri on the ventral side (especially
68s

Hypotrichia
the transverse cirri) of S. mytilus are thicker and thus more conspicuous than those of Pseudostrombidium planc-
tonticum.6 (cimal pattern on ventral side, tuft of caudal cirri) is the key character for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Rare, usually pelagic. Locus classicus is Szeged, Hungary, where HORVATH
( 1933) discovered P. planctontic:um during late March in the effluent of the Cserepesisorer Pond at 6o C. Further
records: about 1000 ind. l-r in a eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Bonn, Germany, from February to
April (WILBERT 1969, I 986a); near Berlin, Germany (SKIBBE 19941, Fig. I I , l2); very abundant under ice of a
lake (Altmühlsee) in Bavaria, Germany (Fig. 13, 14).
Autecological data: Feeds on flagellates, planktonic diatoms and coccal algae (HORVAIIF, tgZZ, WILBERT
1986a); HORVÄTH possibly confused ingested green algae with symbionts. Biomass of 106 individuals about
ll0mg (our calculations). WILBERT (1986a) found P. planc:tonticum at 0.4-11.2' C, pH 1.1-8.3,4.9 to
I ! I
12.5 mg l-r Or, 0-0.5 mg I NH+*-N, 0.0 mg I NOz -N, 3.5-14 mg I NO:--N. The Altmühlsee population
occurredat loC,pH8.8, l7.7mgl-rOz, 1l mgl-r BODs, 10mg1-r DOC,70pgl-r chlorophylla,0. 19mg1-r P,o,ur,
0.09 mg l-r NH4*-N, 2.3 mg l-r NOr--N (material and data kindly provided by Dr. HABERMEHL).
Ecological summary: Known from Europe only. Rare, but possibly often overlooked because most hypotrichs
burst in conventional fixatives. Obviously abundant during spring algal blooms in eutrophic, lentic waters (espe-
cially ponds), presumably because it feeds mainly on algae.
§'-1 ?3
*-
§§ i1\
(1 _-:
t
a
a
ls
i:/
a
\
MI \ . -l
RMR_
DR
! \.
I
, I
/ tI :,.t\
,,
1C
Pseudostrombidium planctonticum (l-7,liom HORVATH 1933; 8-10, fiom WILBERT l9tt6a. I, sublimate-toluidinblue stain; 2, opal-
bluestain;3-7,invivo;8-l0,compositesfromliveandprotargol-impregnatedspecimens). 1,2,9,10:Ciliatureofventral(1,9)anddorsal
(2, l0) side, in vivo I 20- I 60 p m ( l, 2), respectively, 200 pm (9, l0). Arrow in ( I ) marks buccal cirrus near anterior end of undulating mem-
branes; this cirrus is one of the I 8 fronto-ventral-transverse cirri (all cirri, except left and right marginal and caudal cirri), which are charac-
teristic for the family Oxytrichidae. On the dorsal side, there are 6 (numbers l-6) bristle rows, three of which give rise to a conspicuous tuft
ofcaudal cirri.3-7: Shape variants. S: Fine structure ofan adoral membranelle. AM = adoral zone ofmembranelles, CI = caudal cirri, CV =
contractile vacuole, DR = dorsal ciliary rows, FC = frontal cirri, LMR = left marginal cirral row, MA = macronuclear nodule, MI = micronu-
cleus, RMR = right marginal cirral row, TC = transverse cirri, UM = undulating membranes (paroral, long; endoral, short).
686

Hypotrichia
FC
AM
:
".4[lrl
UM
lwr ,::::i:,:::, . ,.,i::i :: :: il: :: i:: :: ::: ': .'! .i ti ':§ ,::i
, :,,t . i:: ::i :. :iS :ii::. :i ::i :, :i. :, ::. ::, :, :t, ii: i
,:: , :,,: :: :i: ii: i.r :! i ::,i ir $ :,li :t:r :: irS i :üir :.: :: ::ii': iil :i: :t :: i: :t ::: :: :ri:i ::i :t ::, :ii ::, i l t: i :, ' :: . . i, . ,,: 1 : M!
:w,r:st:i i: .,:.: ':::
RMR-:nsnii MA
.s,,
'ffi):'
::1,. ,!.,
ffi:,i:t::: LMR
..
11 12
LMR
1,,3 14 ll,5
Pseudostrombiclium planctonticurz, ciliature ol ventral ( I I , I 3) and dorsal ( I 2, l4) side and nuclear apparatus afier protalgotr impregnation
( I I , I 2, from SKIBBE I 994 and unpublished micrograph of same population; 13, 14, from Altmühlsee in Germany, material kindly supplied
by Dr. HABERMEHL). 11-14: Ventral and dorsal views. Arrow in (l l) marks buccal cirrus, arrows in (12) denote four of the six dorsal cili-
ary rows (cp. Fig. l0). Note thatP. planctonticumhas 3 rows of caudal cirri, the main genus character. AM = adoral zone of membranelles,
CI = caudal cirri, FC = frontal cirri, LMR = left marginal cirral row, MA = macronuclear nodules, MI = micronucleus, RMR = right marginal
cirral row, TC = transverse cirri, UM = undulating membranes.
Podophrya sp. (15, in vivo). The P.sezdosn'omhidium planctonticum population from the Altmühlsee (see above) was heavily infected by a
parasitic Podophrya species (-+ Suctoria), whose typical resting cyst is shown.
681

Hypotrichia
S pire te lla planc tic o la Gprr;', 1 e33 ) BoRR or., tsl 2
1933 Spiretta plancticola GELEI, Arch. Protistenk., 80: 126 (brief , illustrated description).
1944 Spiretta planc:ticola GELEI, Miz. F(tz. Kiadja erd. Mriz. Egy ., 2: 147 (detailed description).
1954 Spiretta plancticola GELEI - GELEI, Acta biol. hung., 5: 325 (redescription).
1962 Spiretta plancticola GELEI 1933 - DINGFELDER, Arch. Protistenk., 105: 614 (redescription from life).
1972 Spiretella plankricola (GELEI, 1944) - BORROR, J. Protozool., 19:8, 12 (combining author).
1985 Spiretella plancticola GELE| 1933 - FLEURY, IFTODE, DEROUX & FRYD-VERSAVEL, Protisto-
logica, 21: 508, 515 (redescription after silver impregnation; morphogenesis; ultrastructure).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
Spiretta GELEI is a junior homonym of Spiretta LENDENFELD, a sponge. Thus, BORROR (1912) introduced a
replacement name. Unfortunately, he used two spellings, viz. Spiretella (p.8) and Spiratella (p. 12); we follow
CORLISS (1919), who used Spit"etella. Microspiretta JANKOWSKI, 1915 is an objective junior synonym. Sev-
eral other misspellings contaminate the literature: Spiratella plankticola, Spiretta plankticolus, S. plankticola,
(BORROR 1912), S. planticola (FOISSNER 1979a), Apiretta plancticola (CAIRNS & YONGUE 1973).
Di lferential diagnosis
l) Size in vivo about 95-160 x 90 ;rm.
2) Body + ovoid with anterior third cone-like projecting and groove-like excavated (Fig. -8).
3) Macronucleus dumb-bell shaped, near mid-body (Fig. 1,3,4,5).
4) Contractile vacuole in mid-body near proximal end of adoral zone of membranelles (Fig. 4, 5).
s) Cytoplasm without specific features.
6) Arrangement of cirri and dorsal bristles distinctly different from that of other hypotrichs (from anterior to
posterior): along distal end of adoral zone of membranelles two almost straight rows of long, paired bristles
(Fig. l, 4,7); on dorsal side three bristle rows, each with distinct anterior polymerization bearing about l2
very long bristles on small papilla (Fig. 2,5, 8); one right and left marginal cirral row slightly underneath
mid-body, both almost semicircular and composed of unique, membranelle-like cini, left row comprising
28-32cirri,right3842 (Fig. 1-8, 10-14); on posteriorpole three oblique bristle rows (Fig. 1,2,4,5,1,8).
7) Oral apparatus extends from anterior end to body centre, consists of long, spiralled adoral zone of mem-
branelles and two slightly curved undulating membranes at right margin of buccal cavity. Adoral zone about
50 Vo of body length, consists of 12-100 membranelles (Fig. l-8).
8) Usually floating and rotating very slowly by means of the spread marginal cirri and bristles (Fig. 4, 6, lFl4);
when disturbed, it jumps straight ahead or zigzags backwards.
Similar species
Spiretella plancticola is the sole species known from the genus and easily identified by its unique shape and cir-
ral pattern (Fig. 10-14). 2,6,1 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic, usually in small water bodies, rare. GELEI (1933, 1944, 1950,
1954) and GELEI et al. (1954) discovered Spiretella plancticola in various water bodies (road puddles, ephem-
eral meadow ponds, forest ponds, rock pools, natron waters) near Szeged and Kolozsvär, Hungary. Further
records substantiated by illustrations or micrographs: with high abundance (up to 15 000 ind. I I) in road puddles
688

Hypotrichia
of Bavaria from April to October (DINGFELDER 1962); moorland pond near Constance, Germany (Fig. l0-14).
FLEURY et al. (1985) reactivated S. plancticola from mud (resting cysts) of a desiccated pond near Marrakech,
Morocco. Records not substantiated by illustrations: up to 234 ind. I' (6 m) during early October and up to
53 ind.l-' (15 m) during early November in a eutrophic lake (Plußsee) in Germany (RECK 1987); reservoirs in
the Seversky Donets basin, USSR (KRAVCHENKO 1969); fish ponds in the Tashkent region, USSR (MIRAB-
DULLAEV 1988, 1989); on artificial substrate in the Rhine River in Germany (SCHMITZ 1986).
Autecological data: Feeds on autotrophic and heterotrophic flagellates (GELEI et al. 7954, RECK 1987). Bio-
mass of 106 specimens about 400 mg (our calculations). FLEURY et al. (1985) cultured S. plancticola in table
water and with Chlorogonium sp. as food. RECK (1987) found S. plancticola at 4.4-9.5" C (optimum at 9.5),
pH7.37-8.19 (8.19), 3.6J.6 mg l-r Oz (5.0), 23-60 Vo Oz-satwation (44 Vo), O.16-0.39 mg l'r NH4*. MATIS
(1975) collected it in road pools near Bratislava, Czechoslovakia, at 15-28.5" C, pH 5.8, and 7 .4-8.6 mg l-r Oz.
CAIRNS & YONGUE (1973) found it once in the Cape Fear River, North Carolina, in June at 25-27 .8' C, pH
6.1-6.8, 7-10.2 mg l-r Oz, 2-5.4 mg l-' BODs, 0.02-0.11 mg l-r NH+*-N, 0.2-0.4 mg 1-r NO3-N, 12.5-15 mg I I
cl.
Ecotogical summary: Reliably recorded from Eurasia and Africa. Character species of ephemeral, eutrophic low-
land waters. Eurythermic, likely preferring temperatures >15o C. Flagellate-feeder. Resting cysts known (Fig. 9).
o'§.8
CR
4?'i:--
UM
AM
LMR
MA
RMR
DR
,$
RMR
Spiretella plancticola (frorr-r FLEURY et al. 1985, protargol irnpregnation). 1, 2:
Ciliature of ventral and dorsal side. Note spiral arrangement of adoral zone of mem-
LMR
branelles and cirri and bristle rows.3: Ciliature and macronucleus. Bar = 20 pm. AM
= adoral membranelles forming spiralled zone, CI = three oblique bristle rows on pos-
terior pole, CR = two ciliary rows along distal end of adoral zone, DR = dorsal ciliary
rows, LMR = left marginal cirral row, MA = macronucleus, RMR = right marginal
cirral row, UM = undulating membranes.
689

Hypotrichia
,AM
R
\
DR-
M
I
A
-DR
RMR
RMR '-LMR
DR
\
(\\\t
(
._ ' \.\ r\
a: \.'r,
T\' \i
: t.:
LMR
-RMR
8
Spiretella plancticola (4, fiom CELEI 1954; 5,9, fionr DINGFELDER 1962; 6, 7, tJ, li'om GELEI l9+-1. -1, 6-ll, prcscrvcd and toluidinblue-
stained specimens; 5, 9, in vivo). 4, 5: Ventral views, 160 pm, 146 pm. 6: Frontal view. Note semicircular arrangement of marginal cirral
rows. 7: Right lateral view. 8: Dorsal view. 9: Resting cyst with two conffactile vacuoles and dumb-bell shaped macronucleus, 73 pm. AM =
adoral membranelles forming spiralled zone, CI = three oblique bristle rows on posterior pole, CR = two cirral rows along distal end of ado-
ral zone of membranelles, CV = contractile vacuole, DR = dorsal ciliary rows, LMR = left marginal cirral row, MA = macronucleus, MI =
micronucleus, RMR = right marginal cirral row, UM = undulating membranes.
690



4.4.5 Cyrtophorida FAURP-T'NEMIET iN CORLISS , 1956, NASSUIidA JANKOWSKI, 196],
and Colpodea SMALL 8L LYNN, 1981
The Cyrtophorida, Nassulida, and Colpodea include only one euplanktonic species each. Thus, they are treated
together, although they do not form a monophyletic group.
The Cyrtophorida (e.g. Chilodonella, Trithigmostoma, Trochilia, --> Phascolodon) are characterized by five
traits (FOISSNER et al. 1991, p. 4l): (i) The body is usually distinctly flattened dorso-ventrally and very flexi-
ble; (ii) The somatic ciliature consists of monokinetids (single, ciliated basal bodies) and is largely confined to
the ventral side. The more or less distinctly convex dorsal side is unciliated or, more common, bears the dorsal
brush, that is, a single (rarely two or more), transversely arranged ciliary row; (iii) The oral apparatus is in the
anterior half of the ventral side and consists of several ciliary rows in front of the opening of the conspicuous
oral basket, which is made of solid rods; (iv) The somatic basal bodies have a short, laterally extending kineto-
desmal fibre, a weakly developed transversal microtubule ribbon, convergent postciliary microtubuli, and a
very distinct subkinetal microtubule lamella; (v) The stomatogenesis is somatic, that is, the ciliature of the new
oral apparatus originates from parental ciliary rows. Most species live benthically or in the aufwuchs of running
and stagnant waters, some ale terricolous, and about a quarter is marine. The cyrtophorids are a highly charac-
teristic part of the vagile aufwuchs; thus, the aufwuchs ciliate community has been named Cyrtophoretea.
Trithigmostoma cucullulus is very common in heavily polluted (alphamesosaprobic) running waters, forming
the core of the Trithigmostometum cucullulae (for details, see FOISSNER et al. 1991). Only --> Phas-
colodon lives planktonically in ponds, lakes, and large running waters. The cyrtophorids mainly feed on algae
and bacteria. Resting cyst formation known.
The Nassulida are characterized by the following features (FOISSNER et al. 1994, p. 415): (i) The ciliature is
usually complete (holotrichous) and consists of narrowly spaced monokinetids, that is, of single, ciliated basal
bodies; in the Microthoracina it is more or less distinctly reduced, especially on the left side; (ii) The oral appa-
ratus is usually in the anterior half of the ventral side and consists of a hypostomial ciliary band (synhymenium)
underneath of a conspicuous, funnel-shaped oral basket made of solid rods; (iii) Each kinetid (basal body) is as-
sociated with two alveolocysts, which are invaginations of the alveolar membrane into the cytoplasm; (iv)
Stomatogenesis is rather complicated: the synhymenium originates at the end of the somatic ciliary rows (te-
lokinetal), whereas the inconspicuous undulating membrane is self-replicating and forms the oral basket. Nassu-
lids are common in the benthal of freshwaters, the small microthoracines are also rather frequent in soil; only
few species live in the sea, and -+ Obertrumia aurea is the sole euplanktonic species. Typically, nassulids feed
on filamentous cyanobacteria, which change their colour during digestion, so that these ciliates are usually col-
ourful and thus easily recognized as nassulids (e.g., Nassula, -+ Obertrumia, Pseudomicrothorax). Indeed, it
has been suggested to use such species for controlling cyanobacteria blooms (e.g., BRABRAND et al. 1983,
CANTER et al. 1990, THOMAS 1941). However, other groups prefer diatoms (e.9., Zosterodasys) or bacteria
(microthoracines). Resting cyst formation known.
The Colpodea have four characters in common (FOISSNER et al. 1991, p.387; FOISSNER 1993): (i) The
ciliary rows course in right spirals and consist of dikinetids, that is, basal body pairs with the anterior andlor
posterior basal body being ciliated; (ii) A long transverse microtubule ribbon extends posteriorly from the pos-
terior basal body of each dikinetid. The ribbons of a ciliary row overlap, forming a compact (Lkm-)fibre; (iii)
The silverline system is usually wide-meshed; (iv) The stomatogenesis is, as in cyrtophorids, somatic, that is,
the ciliature of the new oral apparatus originates from parental ciliary rows. Some taxa divide within cysts. Pre-
viously, some species (e.g., Bursaria, --> Bursaridium spp.) were classified within the -+ Heterotrichida. Onto-
genetic and ultrastructural studies, however, revealed that they are closely related to the colpodids s. str. Most
colpodids (about 80 Vo) are confined to terrestrial or semiterrestrial habitats (soils, mosses, temporary water
bodies), few species occur in running waters (often indicating terrestrial influence), and only -+ Bursaridium
pseudobursaria is euplanktonic. Occasionally, -+ Cyrtolophosis mucicola and -+ Colpoda steinii occur in the
pelagial. Most species are bacteriophagous (Colpoda, Cyrtolophosis) or omnivorous (Bursaridium). Resting
cyst formation known.
692

Cyrtophorida
Phasc olodon v orticella srEIN, r 8se
1859 Phascolodon vorticel/a STEIN, Lotos, 9: 2 (without illustration).
1859 Phascolodon vorticel/a STEIN, 1859 - STEIN, Organismus der Infusionsthiere I, p. 110 (detailed de-
scription).
1.)
1924 Phascolodon vorticella STEIN - FAURE-FREMIET, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg. Suppl., 6: l2l (redescription
from live specimens).
l93l Phascolodonvorticel/cSTEIN, 1859-KAHL,TierweltDtl.,2li 232(revision).
19'79 Phascolodon vorticel/a STEIN, 1859 - FOISSNER, Protistologica, 15: 558 (detailed redescription from
live and silver-impregnated specimens).
l99l Phascolodon vorticel/a STEIN, 1859 - FOISSNER, BLATTERER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informa-
tionsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll9l:99 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic
and ecological monograph).
Taxonomy
The descriptions by STEIN (1959), ERLANGER (1890), FAURE-FREMIET (1924), KAHL (1926,1931), and
DINGFELDER (1962), which are based on live observations, differ in some respects. FOISSNER (1979b) thus
supposed that several species might exist.
Differential diagnosis
l) Size in vivo about 60-90 x 35-50 pm, on average about 70 pm long. KAHL (1931) found 50-l l0 pm long
specimens.
2) Body resembling a saddle because of deep, laterally ciliated ventral groove and truncated anterior end
curved brim-like dorsally; ventral posterior end tapered (Fig. 1-4, 6,7,13-15,26,28,29). According to
STEIN, the ventral, rounded comers of the brim can be approached; usually, however, cells are acontractile.
3) Macronucleus usually in posterior body half and slightly right of midline, ellipsoidal (Fig. 2,4, 11,20,25).
4) Two contractile vacuoles, one right underneath of oral opening, the other in posterior body half left of mid-
line (Fig.4, l0).
5) Cytoplasm without peculiarities, cells, however, often green due to large, ingested algae like Pandorina
(Fig. la. 2,ll).
6) On ventral surface several curved and straight ci.liary rows (Fig. 10): 1 transversely arranged preoral row,2
circumoral rows, 5 (sometimes 6) right and 8-10 straight left somatic rows (Fig. 4, l1 , 18, 20, 2I, 23, 24,
26,28,29). Dorsal brush extends transversely near anterior end of convex dorsal side, composed of 14-20
long, needle-like cilia (probably overlooked by some older authors; Fig. 9, ll, 14-16,25).
7) Oral opening near truncated anterior end slightly right of midline, slit-like. Oral basket conical and about
20 pm long, extends dorsally, consists of2G-30 (on average 26) solid rods (Fig. 2,4,8_lO,11,26,21,29).
8) Swims moderately fast in wide spirals.
Similar species
Identification of genus easy due to the curious shape. Phascolodon limneticum GELEI, 1954 (50-60 x
30-35 pm, only 5-6 left ciliary rows) and Phascolodon contractilis KAHL, 1926 (distinctly flattened, only I
contractile vacuole, contracts jerkily) have been superficially described, possibly being junior synonyms of
P has c olo don v o rtic e lla. 2, 4, 6 are key characters for identification.
693

Cyrtophorida
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic in ponds and lakes, but also in temporary pools. According to
FOISSNER (1979a), characteristic for temporary, eutrophic small water bodies, which is in accordance with the
ability to form resting cysts (Fig. 12). Locus classicus is Prague, Czech Republic, where STEIN (1859) discov-
ered Phascolodon vorticella in a basin of the botanical garden in April.
Further records from stagnant waters (some substantiated by illustrations): rain puddles and eutrophic, beta- to
alphamesosaprobic pasture ponds in the Austrian Alps (DALLA TORRE 1891, FOISSNER 1979d, FOISSNER
& ADAM 1979, FOISSNER et al. 1982, -+ Table); hypertrophic pond at Salzburg University, Austria (Fig.
13-11,21-29); among algae, Bulgaria (DETCHEYA 1992); reservoir during spring and summer, lentic areas in
the Morava River system, and in betamesosaprobic waters of Czechoslovakia (MATIS 1977, MATIS & TIR-
JAKovÄ 1994a, MORAVCOY A 1911 , SnÄusr-uusEK 1947); France (FAURE-FREMIET t9z4); in rock
pools with rain water near Heidelberg, Germany, together with -+ Actinobolina radians and Haematoc'occus plu-
vialis (ERLANGER 1890); frequent in the Hamburg Harbour, Germany, from March to June (BARTSCH &
HARTWIG 1984); meso- to eutrophic lake (Heiliges Meer) in Germany (MÜCKE 1979): about 5000 ind. l-r in a
eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Weiher) in Bonn, Germany, during spring (WILBERT 1969, 1972); in sewage
oxidation ponds near Munich, Germany, in spring (KAUFMANN 1958); in the aerobic zone of the pelagial of a
pond in Germany (WETZEL 1928); in Bavaria, Germany, sometimes very abundant (up to 490000ind.1-r) in
road puddles during flagellate blooms, rare in irrigated meadows and grass sward infusions (DINGFELDER
1962); up to 8000 ind. l-' in basins supplied with effluent from a German sewage treatment plant at pH 7.7,
3.24.0mg1'' 02,0.5-l.4mgl-rNH4*-N (BICK 1960); eutrophic sodalake (Lake Cserepeser) in Hungary
(STILLER 1942a); rice paddy supplied with water from Po River, and from other sites in Italy (ENRIQUES
1913, MADONI 1987, 1988, 1996); fishpond during late August and in carp ponds supplied with beet spgar fac-
tory wastes, Poland (CZAPIK 1959, GRABACKA 1977, KWIATKOWSKA-GRABACKA 1965); Moldavian
water bodies, including a cooling plant (CHORIK 1968, CHORIK & VIKOL 1973); ponds and reservoirs in the
Ukraine (DOBROVLIANSKI 1914, KOVALCHUK & SVINTSOYA 1994, KRAVCHENKO 1969, NEBRAT
1980, OLEKSIV 1985, OLEKSIV et al. 1986); fishponds in Uzbekistan (MIRABDULLAEV 1988, 1989); up to
1000 ind.l-r in reservoirs of the USSR, especially during spring (BELOVA 1989, 1994, MAMAEYA 1914a,
l9'76a, l979a,ZHARIKOV 1992, ZHARIKOV & ROTAR 1992); shallow sites of Lake Baikal and other water
bodies in Central Baikal area (GAJEWSKAJA 1933, LOKOT 1987); oxidation pond in India at 50-80 mg ll
BOD5 (KRISHNAMOORTHI & SARKAR 1981) and in Germany (BICK & SCHOLTYSECK 1960); Tibetan
Plateau (SHEN 1983); at 22" C in a small pool with mud, leaves, and mosses at piped spring, Virginia, USA
(BOVEE 1960); southeastem Louisiana, USA (BAMFORTH 1963); Watertank Pond at 24" C and pH 6.0, and
other sites in Michigan and Pennsylvania, USA (CAIRNS 1965, CAIRNS & YONGUE 1966, WANG 1928,
WEST & LUNDIN 1963); in l0 out of 27 samplings from the Putah Creek Lake, California, USA (KENT 1985).
Records from running waters, that is, mainly from river plankton: clean and polluted running waters in Czechoslo-
vakia (BUCHAR 1957, JUSTIN 1960, MORAVCOVÄ 1962, TIRIAKOVÄ 1993); rare in sewage fungus our-
breaks in English rivers (CURTIS & CURDS 1971); alphamesosaprobic section of the Schwalm River, Germany
(HEUSS et al. 1972); Lippe River and Rhine River, Germany (BOCK & SCHEUBEL 1979, SCHMITZ 1986);
cooling system of a conventional power station supplied with water from a mesosaprobic river in Germany
(BERNERTH 1982); 1000 ind. l-r in slowly flowing, saprobic waters in the city of Hamburg, and in the Elbe River
estuary, Germany (CASPERS & SCHULZ 1960,1964, SCHULZ 1961); sometimes numerous and dominant, and
with high (80 Vo) relative frequency in the Danube River (and ox-bows) with up to 700 ind. l-' during late spring
(BERECZKY 1969, 1972, 1975, 1977,197'7a, l9'79a,b, 1991, 1998, BERECZKY & NOSEK 1993, 1994,
BERECZKY Et AI. 1983, HUMPESCH & MOOG 1994, MATIS & TIRIAKOYA 1994b, NOSEK & BEREC-
ZKY 1981, TIRJAKOVÄ 1992, SZENTIVÄNY & TIRJAKOyA tgg+; aurecological data, -+ Table and Eco-
grams); Po River, Italy (FERRARI et al. 1989);I-ynaRiver, and up to 50 ind. l-r in the Vistula River, Poland, dur-
ing spring (HUL 1987, KLIMOWICZ l98l); Llobregat River near Barcelona, Spain (GRACIA & IGUAL 1987,
GRACIA et al. 1989); scanty at 6-8'C and abundant (up to 4600 ind. l') at 10-12'C in the Volga River (MA-
MAEVA 1974b, 1979, MAMAYEVA 1975); Pripyat River, USSR (NEBRAT 1992); with I Vo presence in salt-
polluted (0.4-5.0 g I' Cl) sections of the Weser River, Germany (ALBRECHT 1984, 1986).
694

Cyrtophorida
Autecological data: Feeds mainly on single-celled and colonial algae as well as on cyanobacteria (Anabaena,
Clathrocystis, Dinobryon, Gonium, Pandorina [Fig. 1a], Eudorina, Chlamydomonas, Haematococcus, volvo-
cales, cryptomonads, Euglena, diatoms; BICK 1960, BERECZKY & NOSEK 1994, DINGFELDER 1962,
FOISSNER 1980b, GAJEWSKAJA 1933, MAMAYEVA & KOPYLOV 1978, STEIN 1859, TUCKER 1972),
bur also on bacteria (SZENTIVÄNY & TIRJAKOVÄ 1994). Biomass of 106 specimens about 160 mg (MA-
MAYEVA & KOPYLOV 1978), 100 mg (MAMAEVA 1979), afi 7V75 mg (FOISSNER et al. 1991, NES-
TERENKO & KOVALCHUK 1991). Autecological data -+ Table and Ecograms 2a--e.
Table: Autecological data of Phascolodon vorticella. Column 1, from BERECZKY (1975; many analyses from the Danube River in Hun-
gary); column 2, from FOISSNER et al. (1982; mass occurrences in an alpine rain puddle and a pasture pond); column 3, from RECK
(1987; unknown number of analyses from a eutrophic lake [Plußsee] in Germany at 3*l I m); column 4, from HEUSS (1976; many analy-
ses from slowly flowing brooks in Germany).
Parameters References
1 2 J..| 4
Temperature (" C) t -t5 5.0- t6.3 4.5-t5.4 4-16
pH 1.1-8.2 49-5.0 13-8.2 7 .5-9.3
o, (mg I') 8.4-14.0 1 .8-rr.2 0.5-t4.1 3.1-26.1
Oz (saturation '/o) 84-t49 5-t2t 21-261
BODs (n g I') 6.9-8.3 4.3-28.0
KMnO+ collsumption (mg 1 ') 29-5t 33-t t
HzS (mg 1') 0 0-0.9
coz (mg I') 0-tl 0-1.8 0-18
PO+3 -P (mg I') 0 0.32-t.52
l')
NH+*-N (mg 0.2-0.9 0-0. 1 6 0.05-0.35 0. 19-3.65
Bacteria ml ' (x 10u; plate method) 2-3
Ecological summary: Recorded from Eurasia only. Common, euplanktonic ciliate in ponds, lakes, and large
running waters. Throughout the year, that is, eurythermic, however, spring and autumn possibly preferred.
Oligo-euryhaline. As an algae feeder, Phascolodon vorticella indicates eutrophic conditions when occurring in
great number. Possibly a weak competitor because frequent in temporary waters. Resting cysts known. Saprobic
classification according to FOISSNER et al. (1991): beta- to alphamesosaprobic (b = 6, a= 4,I = 3, SI = 2.4).
.1,
E
1986 1987 1988 1989 1990
date
§Nl PL vorticclla ffi other Ciliatcs
Ecogram 1: Dynamics of Pltust'olorlotr t'ot'tit'ellcl it't the surf'ace water of Danube
River at Göd in surface water (from BERECZKY 1998).
Fig. la: Phascolodon vorticella (original from eutrophic pond at Salzburg Univer-
sity) having ingested many Pandorina colonies. Arrowhead marks oral basket.
695

Cyrtophorida
110 110 110
100 r00 100
90 90 90
80 80 80
70 70 70
60 60 60
50 50 50
40 40 40
50 50 30
20 20 20
10 10 t0
0 0.7 11.2 21.7 0 7.28 0 0.7 10.5 20.3
woter temperoture (C) psychrophile bocteriol count (ina/l)
110 I l0
100 100
90 90
80 80
70 70 Ecograms 2a-e: Frequency distribution
60 60 of Phascolodon vorticella in the Danube
50 50
40 40 River, related to various environmental
50 50 factors (from BERECZKY & NOSEK
20 20 1993). Empty bars = weighted presence
10 10 frequency distribution, filled bars =
0 6.9 12.1 17 .1 0 4.9 11.2 17.5 weighted abundance frequency distribu-
dissolved oxygen (^g/t) chemicol oxygen demond (^g/t) tion.
oB-
\
6
CO PO
I
SS
MA
t..
,t ...'..-
T
I
Phascolodon vorticella (lb-3, from STEIN 1859; 4-'7,from KAHL l93l; 8-i2, fiom FOISSNER 1979d. lb-8, [2, in vivo; 9, 10, shape
from life, ciliary pattem after protargol impregnation; 1 I , in vivo, dorsal brush and silverline system after Klein-Foissner silver nitrate im-
pregnation). 1b4,7: Ventral ( 1b, 2, 4) and right lateral (3, 7) views, 86 pm, 90-l l0 pm (rarely only 50 pm long). 5, 8: Rods comprising
oral basket. 6: Cross-section showing ciliated longitudinal groove on ventral side. 9, 10: Oblique right lateral and ventral view of ciliary
pattem,88 pm,63 pm. Arrowheads mark excretory pore of contractile vacuoles. 11: Dorsal view (70pm) showing transversely arranged
dorsal brush (arrow), part of silverline system, nuclear apparatus, and food vacuoles with single-celled and colonial algae. 12: Resting cyst
in middle stage of formation, 45 pm. Arrowhead denotes mucous layer. CO = circumoral ciliary rows, CV = contractile vacuoles, DB =
dorsal brush, FV = food vacuoles, LC = left ciliary rows, OB = oral basket, MA = macronucleus, PO = preoral ciliary row, RC = right cili-
ary rows, SS = silverline system.
696



Cyrtophorida
CO
-RC
DB
OB
24 25
silver nitrate impregnation; 20, 23-25, protargol impregnation; 22, scanning electron micrograph). 18, 20,21, 23, 24'. Ctliary pattem of
ventral side. Arrowheads in ( I 8, 20, 23) mark opening of oral basket. The outer right ciliary rows begin near the upper end of the left side
ciliary rows (arrow in 21) and extend, via the dorsal anterior brim (collar), to the right wall ofthe ventral groove, where they course to the
posterior body end. 19, 25: Dorsal views showing dorsal brush (arrows in 19).22: Detail of cortex. CO = circumoral ciliary rows, DB =
dorsal brush, LC = left ciliary rows, MA = macronucleus, OB = oral basket, PO = preoral ciliary row, RC = right ciliary rows.
698

Cyrtophorida
ffi
NN
N
,.\..§\N:$
NN,{.W-§\\\-§
N
N
NN
iiNN
§&N§[N\\\§l
w§§§
ffiw:i
ffi§
ffi
W
ffi
ffi
W
Phascolodon vorticella \26-29, original scanning electron rnicrographs of a population from the eutrophic pond at Salz-
burg University, Austria). 261 28r 29t Ventrolateral views. Arrows in (26,29) mark ventral furrow, arrowheads denote slit-
like mouth opening of oral basket. Note highly characteristic, saddle-like body shape. 272 The oral basket can open widely
(cp. Figure 17) and consists of 2O-30 (mean = 26) solid rods whose almost rectangularly attached teeth (cp. Figures 5, 8)
encircle the oral opening like a crown. LC = left ciliary rows, OB = oral basket, RC = right ciliary rows.
699

Nassulida
Obertrumia aurea GHRENBERG, rs33) ForssNER, 1987
1833 Nassula aUTeaEHRENBERG, Abh. dt. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, year 1833: 305.
1838 Nassula aurea EHRENBERG, 1833 - EHRENBERG, Infusionsthierchen, p. 340 (revision).
1931 Nassula aurea EHRENBERG, 1833 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl.,21: 217 (revision).
l98l Obertrumia georgiana (DRAGESCO, 1972) - FOISSNER & ADAM, Zool. Anz.,2O1:308 (misidentifi-
cation; redescription from life and silver-impregnated specimens).
1986 Nassula aurea EHRENBERG, 1833 - DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS, Faune tropicale, 26:251
(brief taxonomic and faunistic monograph).
1981 Obertumia aurea (EHRENBERG, 1833) - FOISSNER, Arch. Protistenk., 133:223 (combining author
and explanation of the complicated nomenclature of the nassulid genera Nassula, Obertrumia, Zostero-
graptus, Naxella, and Rhinakis).
1994 Ohertrumia aurea (EHRENBERG 1833) FOISSNER, 1981 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, In-
formationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll94: 451 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is,
taxonomic and ecological monograph).
1994 Obertrumia aurea (EHRENBERG, 1833) - FOISSNER, Marine Microbial Food Webs, 8: 16 (brief re-
view on plankton ciliates).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
Obertumia in DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS (1986, p. 257) is an incorrect subsequent spelling.
FOISSNER & ADAM (198 l) established Obertrumia for nassulids with a bipartite hypostomial ciliary band
(synhymenium). KAHL ( 193 1) distinguished Obertr"umia aurea from Nassula ornata EHRENBERG, I 833, in-
ter alia, by a ring-like structure around the feeding basket (Fig. 1a). However, a reinvestigation of N. ornatq re-
vealed that this species also has such a ring (FOISSNER et al. 1994); thus, this character cannot be used for
separating these species. Obertrumia aurea is the sole nassulid common in pond and lake plankton, provided
that filamentous cyanobacteria are abundant.
Differential iagnosi
d s
1) Size in vivo l2O-250 x 10-140 pm, usually about 200 x 100 pm.
2) Body slenderly to broadly ellipsoidal, usually slightly narrowed posteriorly, left anterior margin with incon-
spicuous irregularity marking site where hypostomial ciliary band extends dorsally (Fig. l-3, 12, 11 ,23,
30). Flattened up to 2: I dorsoventrally.
3) Macronucleus in posterior body half, globular. 1-4 globular micronuclei (Fig. 3, 13).
4) Contractile vacuole near mid-body, surrounded by large collecting vacuoles (Fig. 3, 9, 13,20).
5) Cortical granules (extrusomes of mucocyst-type) inconspicuous but form thick envelope when methyl
green-pyronin is added (Fig. 4, 19, 24,25). Cells colourful by food vacuoles containing cyanobacteria and
algae in different stages of digestion; well-fed specimens dark at low magnification (Fig. 12, 16, 11 ,23,28).
6) About 100-120 meridional ciliary rows (Fig. 9-11,20-22,30,31).
7) Oral opening in anterior third near midline of body. Oral basket very conspicuous, ringed, made up of 16-28
slightly twisted, solid rods (Fig. 3, 5,13,14,16, 18, 19,28). Hypostomial ciliary band (synhymenium; diffi-
cult to recognize in live specimens) bipartite: ventrolateral portion sigmoidal with 18-24 ciliary tufts, dorsal
porrion straight with 20-24 rufrs (Fig. l, 6-l l, 20-22, 26, 29*3 l).
8) Swims lowly in wide spirals or creeps clumsily on organic debris.
100

Nassulida
Similar species
Easily recognizable as nassulid ciliate because of the colourful food vacuoles and the conspicuous oral basket.
Species identification, however, is more difficult. Obertrumia georgiana (DRAGESCO, 1912b) has distinct, fu-
siform extrusomes, llke Nassula ornata; Obertrumia xantha DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS, 199 I has
as yet been found only in Africa and possesses a yellow colour and symbiotic green algae; Obertrumia regina
ALEKPEROV, 1984 is larger (about 350 pm long) and has more somatic ciliary rows (130-140) and tufts in
the hypostomial band. Obertrumia kaftli FOISSNER, 1989 and O. gracilis FOISSNER, 1989 are distinctly
smaller (80-130 pm) and thus have fewer ciliary rows (46 and 60 on average) and ciliary tufts (in total about
15). Nassula ornata EHRENBERG, 1833 is more bulky, has distinct, fusiform extrusomes (trichocysts) and a
continuous (not bipartite) hypostomial band (detailed description, see FOISSNER et al. 1994, p. a3O. Nassula
picra GREEFF, 1888 is distinctly smaller (7Vl4O pm; detailed description in FOISSNER et al. 1994,p.445).
Nassulopsis elegans (EHRENBERG, 1833) is more slender and has 3-5, longitudinally arranged contractile
vacuoles (detailed description in FOISSNER et al. 1994, p. 430). Holophrya species have a less conspicuous,
apical oral basket and the contractile vacuole in the rear body end (detailed description of species in FOISS-
NER et al. 1994, p.322-343). I and 5 (extrusomes of mucocyst-type, no trichocysts and symbiotic algae) are
key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Throughout the year in the benthal and pelagial of stagnant water bodies. Also
in slowly running waters and small, temporary pools because resting cysts can be made (Fig. 15). Usually
planktonic and abundant only during blooms of filamentous cyanobacteria.
The locus classicus is in the Berlin area, Germany, where EHRENBERG (1833) discovered O. aurea in a peat-
bog in June. Records (most not substantiated by illustrations) from ponds, lakes, reservoirs and very slowly run-
ning waters: in drifts and plankton of a highly eutrophic lake (Obertrumer See; genus name!) in Salzburg, Aus-
tria, during a peak of Oscillatoria rubescens in September (FOISSNER & ADAM 1981); up to 10 ind. I I in the
pelagial of a eutrophic lake (Wörthersee) in Austria during wintertime (FINDENEGG 1933); beta- to alpha-
mesosaprobic waters in Czechoslovakia (SRÄMEK-HUSEK 1956, 1951) and Benin, Africa (DRAGESCO &
DRAGESCO-KERNEIS 1986); plankton of a polytrophic lake in Germany (PACKROFF & WILBERT 1991);
sometimes rather abundant in the plankton of English, German, and Swiss lakes 1BÜRGI et al. 1985, CANTER
et al. 1990, MARSSON 1901, THOMAS 1941, 1964,ZACHARIAS 1894); very abundant in the surface plank-
ton of Lake Baikal (GAJEWSKAJA 1933); pond in Bohemia (§VEC 1897) and near Brisbane, Australia
(SCHEWIAKOFF 1893); detritus drifts of Lake Balaton, Hungary, and littoral of Lake Geneva, Switzerland
(GELLERT & TAMAS 1959, ROUX 1900, l90l); in the fluffy, aerobic sediment of an English lake (BRY-
ANT & LAYBOURN 1974); in the sediment of unfertilized and fertilized rearing fishponds of Poland (GRA-
BACKA 191 l, l97l); numerousat5oCandpH6.2inclear tundrapoolsfrommeltedsnowinAlaskaduring
June and July (SULLIVAN 1957); up to 5000 ind. 1-r in French bogs during summer (GROLIERE 1911); at
19'C and at pH 6.0 in a bog of Michigan, USA (CAIRNS & YONGUE 1966); wet meadows in Bulgaria
(DETCHEVA 1972a); tree holes in the USA (LACKEY 1940).
Records from running waters: mesosaprobic river in Upper Austria (BLATTERER 1994, FOISSNER &
MOOG 1992); scanty to numerous in betamesosaprobic rivers of the Neckar area and in beta- to al-
phamesosaprobic rivers of Bavaria, Germany, with a distinct frequency maximum during autumn and winter
(BUCK 1961, FOISSNER et al. 1992a, 1994, -+ Ecogram a); saprobic brook in Czechoslovakia (BUCHAR
1957); oligosaprobic brook in Yugoslavia (PRIMC 1988); in fresh samples from a brook of Kansas (SMITH
1914; with illustration); lentic areas of large rivers in Colorado (BEARDSLEY 1902); small soft water river in
the eastern USA (PATRICK 1961); plankton of an American river (LACKEY 1938b).
AGAMALIYEV & ALIYEV (1983) and LACKEY & LACKEY (1963) recorded Obertumia aurea from the ben-
thal of estuaries. KAHL ( 193 I ) found it very abundantly in a slightly saline (3 Voo) ditch, and MIHAILOWITSCH
701

Nassulida
(1989) observed some specimens in saline running waters at less than 1 g lr Cl; according to LEVANDER (1894,
1894a), VERSCHAFFELT (1930), and PATTERSON et al. (1989) also in marine habitats.
Autecological data: Feeds mainly on filamentous cyanobacteria (Anabaena variabilis, A. flos-aquae, Aphani-
zomenon flos-aquae f . gracile, Gloeocapsa sp., Lyngbya aeruginosa, Oscillatoria tenuis, O. formosa, O. rubes-
cens, Phormidium uncinatum, P. autumnale, P. inundatum, P. retzii), occasionally on diatoms (Synedra) and
Synura uvella (DRYDEN & WRIGHT 1987, FAURB-rRenAmf 1961, FOISSNER & ADAM 1981, GA-
JEWSKAJA 1933, HAUSMANN & RÜSKENS 1984, POILVERT 1959, THOMAS 1941). Osciilatoria limosa
is also ingested, but less readily (POILVERT 1959). CANTER et al. (1990) observed a distinct reduction of the
cyanobacteria during mass occurrence (750 000 ind. l-'; generation time 5.4 d) of O. aurea (-+ Ecograms b, c);
this was also noted by THOMAS (1941) and EBERLY (1959) in Swiss, respectively, American lakes. The dark
green and violet food vacuoles disappear first during starvation (that is, they are the youngest vacuoles), after
8-10 days the cells are packed with brown vacuoles; continuous starvation causes death or encystment (HAUS-
MANN & RÜSKENS 1984). Resting cysts distinctly faceted (CANTER etal.1990; Fig. 15). Biomass of 106
specimens according to BÜRGI et al. (1985) 1500 mg, according to FOISSNER et al. (1994; calculated from
average size) about 500 mg. FINDENEGG (1933, 1943) observed O. aurea in the pelagial of Carinthian lakes
from January to March at 3.+-11" C (optimum 3-6o C). ISSEL (1901) recorded it from 42" C warm springs;
however, identification was certainly incorrect because the specimens were only 40 pm long. Occasionally, O.
aurea is infested by Podophryo sp., an ectoparasitic suctorian (CANTER et al. 1990).
Table: Autecological data of Obertrumia aurea. Cohtmn 1, from PATRICK et al. (1961; 2 analyses from the Savannah River, USA, sup-
plemented with I analysis by RUTHVEN 1972 from the South River, USA); column 2, from BICK & KUNZE ( 197 I ; summary of litera-
ture data, supplemented by FOISSNER et al. 1994 with 1 analysis from a beta- to alphamesosaprobic brook in Upper Austria); column 3,
from DETCHEVA ( 1983c; I analysis from a betamesosaprobic section of a Bulgarian river); column 4, from MIHAILOWITSCI{ ( I 989; 5
analyses from salt-polluted running waters in Germany).
Parameters References
.)
1 2 J 4
Frequency (7o) 0.3
Temperature (' C) t2-23 3.4-422 10 9 .4-r 5.0
pH 8.2 7.0 6.8 I .4-7.6
o, (mg I') 8.5-< 10.0 3.2-8.5 10. 1 2.5-6.1
Oz (saturation 7o) 3 3-89 89
l')
BoDs (mg 0.5-1.0 3.t-24.5
l')
NH+*-N (mg 0-0.031 <2.9 0.02 0. 17-0.56
NOg -N (mg 1') 0.07-0.39 0.8 0.23 t.I-2.9
NOz -N (mg 1') <0.002 <0.03 0.006 0.02-0.1
PO+3 -P (mg I ') 0.115 0.09
INHTN.
2 Probably the incorrect value mentioned by ISSEL ( 1 90 I ; see above).
Ecological summary: Cosmopolitan. Common in the benthal and pelagial of ponds and lakes, especially when
filamentous cyanobacteria, the preferred food, are abundant. Throughout the year, that is, eurythermic,
however, temperatures below 15o C are probably preferred. Euryhaline. Resting cysts known. Saprobic classifi-
cation according to FOISSNER et al. (1994): betamesosaprobic to alphamesosaprobic (b = 6, a = 4, I = 3, SI =
2.4).
102

Nassulida
5 25
.^
4,5
a
4 20F
tr
o
5r5 .:J
€ o
5 15 0 Ilcogram of Obertrumia aurea (from
o § FOISSNER et al. 1994). a: Frequency
o c 2,5 \.-/ (c/o) and average estimated abundance
o
U 2 10 ä (bars = minimum and maximum ac-
c :l 1,5 c o cording to the scale of ZELINKA &,
-o \tr,C8ff tM oA R alV phA aN m: esI , 2 s, p3, o5 b, iJ ,9 A) in eth re Rb ie vt ea r-
o a r c m p
1
rund Vils River in Bavaria during the
0,5 1r- years 198l-1991. The average abun-
oa
0 23 5 6 7 I I 10 dance was calculated from the esti-
Mo nn 3th 3s 1 48 20 424 18 26 53 26 32 s7 111 6 21 82 E 379 r bn ea rt e od f sa ab mu pn ld ea s n pce e rp mer o nre thc .ord. n = num-
1 000 1 000
- i
i- L
F: E
100 100
E E
5 5
?
ä c10 u O Co. ) 10
c,
*6, +c) I
r.o 1.0 "1lIr1 L00 A sI 1.0 Äl'1 i.0-r100 A
;
E 4\ LIE
§
iI T5I *lSrroL \ ;c l- o.rfro
0.1 6q't 0.1 lI l c o r-E 0.1 \ \ =ollCo E
(J Ilro \ olo
11 (J o-01r1 ()
0.01 0.01 0.01
-E (L
s
*. l,-t)
:E
ä(g
-c
to.
o
o
g18
o
t:-,
t§
o 1a.
o.
E
Fo)10
10
ä8
c
J uly Aug. Sept. Oct. Sept. Oct.
1 987 1 987
Ecograms of Obcrtrturtitt uttt'('(t (b. c. I'r'ottt (-'AN I[rl< ct ltl. 1990t. b, c: Nurrrbcl's ol'cyano[-ractcria itncl Oltct'lt'tttrtitt ttttt'r'rr (t-rlack tl'iatt-{les)
as related to some physical and chemical variables in Esthwaite Water (b) and Blelham Tarn (c) during 1987. Arrow in (b) indicates en-
cystment of Obertrumia aurea. Black dots - Oscillatoria agardhii var.isothrix (for Blelham Tarn Oscillatoria agardhü var. isothrix and
O. agardhii; mm ml-r), black squares = Aphanizomenon flos-aquae f . gracile (mm ml'), white dots - Anabaena flos-aquae complex
(mm ml '), white squares * Gomphosphaeria naegeliana (colonies ml r),black triangles - Obertrumia aurea (ind. ml ').
703

Nassulida
:§:.iäii
3i:g:i3gs
?i.i:'.;S:p:t
4
FV
B
,0
)-'
aa
l- --
C
\
10
Obertrumia aurea (1, from KAHL l93l; 2, from PEN 1925;
6-8, from DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERXEIS tgr "inEsL; 6-1 l,
Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate impregnation). 1-3: Vent o platelet-
like when extruded (left) and extend to long threads for :al basket,
which consists of 16-28 solid rods and has a distinct r bertrumia
differs from Nassula by the bipartite hypostomial ciliar n (II; Fig.
6) is dorsal. CA = caudal cilia, CP = cytopyge, CR = cil ole, HC =
hypostomial ciliary band (synhymenium), MA = macro
704

Nassulida
OB
ry CV.
'[3
.,".ru
-=
,,
''t.
:::.:.::,:.1.t1!.tttt:ttt::.:t:::.::::::
%/ti;?t!t;;i.r'Wtt//tilü.*A
flT ,//1)fl//i:!.1./rgY///1-;täa+1Y
Obertrumia aurea (12-14, 16 19, fl'om FOISSNER et al. 1994; l-5, flom CANTER et al. 1990. 12, 15-17, in vivo bright field
micrographs; 13, 14, 18, 19, in vivo interference contrast micrographs). 12: Ventral view ofa freely motile specimen among cyanobacteria
filaments. Note the slight protrusion (arrow), where the hypostomial ciliary band runs dorsally. 13: Ventral view of a slightly squeezed
specimen. Well-fed individuals of Obern'Ltmia oureo are colourful due to cyanobacteria and algae in different stages of digestion. 14, l8:
Oral basket. Arrows mark rod thickenings, forming a distinct ring. 15: Faceted resting cyst, about 120 pm across. 16: Anterior end with
feeding basket in frontal view. The cytoplasm contains many violet food vacuoles with remnants of cyanobacteria and algae. 17: Ventral
view of a freely motile specimen, which is blue-black by numerous violet food vacuoles. 19: Anterior end of oral basket. The background
granulation is caused by numerous mucocysts, which form a thick envelope when ejected (Fig.24). CV = contractile vacuole, FV = food
vacuoles, MA = macronucleus, MI = micronucleus, OB = oral basket.
705

Nassulida
Fdffi
\."".,"
C.P 21
s,u
:.li.t i*.ttt:. ,t :* * , ., :. *. ::t
#
gli::1:;.1.i: .-,ttttiittt "* ttt, r_.-t';. f,,:,,. .* .*., !; " * , ;' n' ... . * q ,,,,, ,*,
i t t ,' : : ':-t.r .,, Y, .t . * x.\ |,- a , vh. .:i. i; b , -:; :-t* ,:? io n i ,* i* | -::+)!..:: .?i::.#:t: .*;||:t,Jjfrt!:D/H,j#w#j.:.t:ry! ..::*a:!/t!:t::::. .* :;::: .. 4t- *- * : l: * 4:: '::; *: : ::l ::|: ::: :::: :: ' : l+::t r) ! ::t ::l}l l:' : l:| ):W ;.111i: :: :19)
t .,, it ,( t , fr* i.t .it.'', '' i .{.t:":t : o,: :i.' '.:' * * - o*" :t . , ,:,.t '' :. .. "fi .1 ry;1 {.* :+ A{ d'- ili #,'; Jff ;! !; ,4 |: '*l::tl:l: : S) ;::: tl::: t.rin
.,,.ffi,,*
t*.
Obertrumia aurea (from FOISSNER et al. 1994. 20-22, silver carbonate impregnation; 23, in vivo bright field
micrograph). 20r 21: Ciliature of ventral and dorsal side. Arrow in (20) marks excretory pore of contractile vacuole. Ar-
rows in (21) denote the margins of the straight portion of the hypostomial ciliary band, where the ciliary tufts are smaller
and more closely spaced than in the S-shaped, ventro-lateral portion (Fig. 8, 22).Underneath the synhymenium is a narrow,
unciliated stripe. 222 Ventral anterior portion showing the S-shaped, ventrolateral section of th'e hypostomial ciliary band,
where the ciliary tufts are larger and more widely spaced than in the straight, dorsal portion (Fig. 21). Arrow marks the in-
conspicuous undulating membrane right of the oral basket opening. 23: Ventral view of a freely motile specimen showing
the typical body shape of Obertrumia aurea and its dark appearance at low magnification due to many colourful vacuoles
containing cyanobacteria in different stages of digestion. CP = cytopyge, CR = ciliary rows, HC = hypostomial ciliary
band (synhymenium), OB = oral basket, 5{J = preoral suture where the ciliary rows of the right and left side abut.
106

Nassulida
b.:s,"s'
$*
:: s# , : :::i::il:: 'l8s §.::
:::*:i:
:. ,r:.*r s
:,:::i " s
,*
: &i
,rrrllr,, *'§.i*
$q '.$
*:
&.$ s ffi s
r(S *§. ft, ,$,
:,t,i;i:: e§ts
rl :,: l1: tr :: iI tl,: :: ": , S#F s x* § §, *,&
:, , il l:, , , : l , ; i 'l :i ,: r,; :,::; : ,, , * . &:!i: . kds' § :**: & :k. R
&, :::::
& r;Nl #, ::S,
,. lli...- '.,
Obertrumiaaurea (24,27,from FOISSNER & ADAM 1981, specimens fiom a lake [Obertrumer See] near Salzburg dur-
ing a heavy Oscillatoria rubescens bloom; 25, 26, from FOISSNER et al. 1994, specimens from the Amper River in Ba-
vaia. 24, 27, methyl green-pyronin stain; 25, scanning electron micrograph; 26, silver carbonate impregnation). 24, 27:
When methyl green-pyronin is added the extrusomes (mucocysts) are released as polygonal platelets (27), which elongate
and fuse very rapidly to a conspicuous, homogenous envelope (arrows in 24). 25:. Cells fixed with osmic acid eject their
mucocysts, which fuse very rapidly to a compact layer covering the cilia. 26tThe dorsal portion of the hypostomial ciliary
band, which is perpendicularly arranged to the main body axis, consists of ciliary tufts more minute and narrowly spaced
than those in the sigmoidal ventrolateral portion (Fig. 22). CR = ciliary rows, HC = hypostomial ciliary band (synhyme-
nium).
107

Nassulida
28
Obertrumia aurea (28-31, l'rorn FOISSNER et al. 1994, specirnens frorn the Amper Rivel in Bavaria. 28, in vivo bright
field micrograph;29-31, scanning electron micrographs). 28: Ventral view of a slightly squeezed specimen with many col-
ourful food vacuoles. 29: Ciliature of ventral anterior body portion. Arrow marks oral opening, which is difficult to dis-
cem because of the dense ciliation. The hypostomial ciliary band begins underneath the oral opening and extends to the left
and anterior onto the dorsal side (Fig. 20,21). 30r 31: Ciliature of ventral and dorsal side. Obertrumia aurea has many
cilia, forming a dense fur. The small flakes (arrows) on the surface are slimy aggregates of extruded mucocysts. FV = col-
ourful food vacuoles, HC = hypostomial ciliary band (synhymenium), OB = oral basket.
708

Colpodea
B ur s aridium p s e ud o b ur s aria lnaunn-nnEMrET, tg24) K AHL, t s2i
1924 Thylakidium pseudohursaria FAURE-FREMIET, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg., Suppl. 6: 139.
1921 Bursaridium dfficile KAHL, Arch. Protistenk.,5T: 201 (synonym).
192'7 Bursaridium (Thylakidium) pseudobursaria FAURE-FR. - KAHL, Arch. Protistenk., 57: 201 (combin-
ing author).
1932 Bursaridium (Thylacidium) pseuclobursaria FAURE-FR., 1924 and Bursaridium dfficile KAHL, 1921 -
KAHL, Tierwelt DtI., 25: 480 (revision).
1933 Bursaridium pseudobursaria (FAURE-FREMIET) KAHL 1921 - WANG & NIE, Contr. biol. Lab. Sci.
Soc., China, 10: 48.
1961 Bursaridium difficile KAHL, l92l - VUXANOVICI, Studii Cerc. Biol., 13: 293 (redescription from
life).
l99l Bursaridium pseudobursaria (FAURE-FREMIET, 1924) KAHL, 1921 - FOISSNER, BLATTERER,
BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll9l: 433
("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecological monograph).
1993 Bursaridium pseudobursaria (FAURE-FREMIET, 1924) KAHL, 1921 - FOISSNER, Protozoenfauna,
4ll: 41 I (detailed revision, including ultrastructural data).
Taxonomy
Detailed explanation of synonymy, see FOISSNER (1993). The location of the contractile vacuole and its ex-
cretory pore as well as body shape show rather high intraspecific variability and thus cannot be used,for species
distinction.
Di lferential d iagnosis
1) Length in vivo 80-200 pm, usually 110-150 pm, a little less than twice as long as wide, namely about
115x69pm(n=30).
2) Body bursiform, anterior end transversely or slightly obliquely truncate, posterior usually broadly rounded;
barrel-shaped, slightly conical, and somewhat campanulate specimens also occur (Fig. 1-3, 4a, b, 5-9,
12-14, 16). Unflattened or slightly compressed dorsoventrally (Fig. 4c,14, 15).
3) Macronucleus in or near centre of cell, reniform to short-ellipsoidal (Fig. l-4).
4) Contractile vacuole slightly to distinctly subterminal in or near midline of ventral side. Excretory pore ex-
traordinarily large, that is, about 5 pm in diameter (Fig. 1-3, 12, 13,16).
s) Extrusomes rod-shaped, about 6 pm long, difficult to recognize in vivo because of their transparency; thus,
they do not form a distinct fringe (Fig. 1,5-9).
6) About 120 meridional ciliary rows composed of widely spaced basal body pairs having only the posterior
basal body ciliated, commence with 6-12 tightly spaced cilia producing distinct ribbon around vestibular
opening (Fig. l, 4,4a-c,6,ll-14,15, 17, 18).
7) Oral apparatus huge, vestibular opening occupies anterior end and has a broad, U-shaped ventral cleft about
l/3 of body length, thus producing a right and left vestibular wall. Vestibulum horn-shaped comprising cup-
like anterior and tubular posterior portion, which curves rightwards. At inner side of left vestibular wall
about 50 conspicuous adoral organelles (Fig. 14, 4a-c, 5-9, 12-16, 19).
8) Swims moderately fast by rotation about main body axis, never rests (for details, see BERG & SAND
1994).
709

Colpodea
Similar species
Bursaridium pseudobursaria is very fragile and thus difficult to study. Bursaridium schewiakowü LAUTER-
BORN is about 250 pm long and has an about 25 trrm thick, radially striated peripheral layer, probably pro-
duced by extraordinarily large extrusomes. Several other species have been described. All are poorly known
and look rather similar to pseudobursaria, with which they are probably synonymous (FOISSNER 1993).
^8.
Bursaria species are larger (250-500 x 150-300 pm), have a deeper ventral cleft, and a long, tortuous macronu-
cleus. Bursaridium pseudobursaria is easily confused with -+ Linostomella vorticella, which has a similar size,
shape, and location of the oral apparatus. However, L. vorticella has a moniliform macronucleus, an indistinct
excretory pore, and very conspicuous adoral membranelles at the anterior body end. Thylakidium species are
rathersimilarinshapebutusuallysmaller(<l00pm)andgreenduetosymbioticalgae. 1,3,5,7arekeychar-
acters lor identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic in lakes, ponds, reservoirs, and large running waters, where it oc-
curs rather frequently, especially during the colder half of the year (GROLIERE 1917 , KAHL 1926, NAU-
WERK 1963, VUXANOVICI 196l,WETZEL 1928a), but rarely becomes very abundant (KAHL 1926, KENT
1985). However, FOISSNER (1993) observed a mass occurrence in a forest pond near the town of Salzburg,
Austria, during late autumn.
The locus classicus is the pelagial of a pond in Pr6cey, Vall6e d l'Oise, France (FAURE-FREMIET 1924). KAHL
(1926) discovered the synonym, B. dfficile, near Hamburg, Germany, in marshy ponds of a bog (Eppendorfer
Moor). Further records documented by illustrations: frequent in surface samples from a lotus pond in Nanking,
China, during January (WANG & NIE 1933); lakes in Norway (BERG & SAND 1994, NAUWERK 1963,
SKOGSTAD et al. 1987) and Rumania (VUXANOVICI 196l,1962).
Records not documented by illustrations: excavated groundwater ponds in Austria (KRAINER 1988); eutrophic
alpine lake (Piburger See) in Tyrol, Austria (SCHLOTT-IDL 1984); Sphagnum and forest ponds in France
(GROLIERE 1911, 1978, GROLIERE & NJINE 1973); about 1 ind. l-r in a eutrophic pond (Poppelsdorfer Wei-
her) in Bonn, Germany, during summer and autumn (WILBERT 1969); moderately abundant in stagnant river
water of Germany (WETZE,L 1928a; as B. schewiakowä); up to 30 ind. cm-2 in the aufwuchs of an alphameso-
saprobic reservoir in Germany during winter and spring (NUSCH 1970); pond near Kiev during December and
reservoirs in the Ukraine (KOVALCHUK & SVINTSOYA 1994, NEBRAT 1980); mesotrophic lake in the
USSR during summer (SHCHERBAKOV 1969); Lake Onega, USSR (KUSTOVLYANKINA 1990); Star
Lake, Vermont, USA (JACK & GILBERT 1993a): impounded stream with turbid water in California, USA
(KENT 1985); rare in unspecified limnetic habitats of southeastern Louisiana and Michigan, USA (BAM-
FORTH 1963, LUNDIN & WEST 1963); tundra ponds in Alaska (SULLMN 1957; a doubtful identification
because of large size,25V450 pm); rare in Lake Cromwell, Canada (PUYTORAC et al. 1972).
Records from running waters: Volga River, USSR (MAMAEVA 1979); numerous among Spirogyra filaments
in the Bugga Stream, India, during early January (NAIDU 1965; probably a misidentification); Savannah River,
USA (PATRICK et al.1961).
Autecofogical data: Feeds mainly on algae, for example, dinophyceans (Woloszynskia bostoniensls), chryso-
phyceans (Monochrysis, Mallomonas acaroides), and cryptophyceans, such as Rhodomonas minuta, Chroomo-
nas sp., and Cryptomonas spp. (JACK & GILBERT 1993a, SKOGSTAD et al. 1987). Bacteria, cyanobacteria,
diatoms, chlorophyceans, and euglenids are usually not ingested (SKOGSTAD etal.1987). KAHL (1932), how-
ever, observed purple bacteria in the food vacuoles. Food threshold (r. = 0) is 0.38 pg C ml I (JACK & GIL-
BERT 1993a). Biomass of 106 specimens 342 + 74 ng (n = 30; SKOGSTAD et al. 1987). JACK & GILBERT
(1993a) calculatedamaximumgrowthrate(r-)of about0.86dr at2l.C:. suspendedfine(<1 pm)andcoarse
particles (l-2 pm) had no effect (JACK & GILBERT 1993a, JACK et al. 1993). WILBERT (1969) found .8.
pseudobursaria in a eutrophic pond at 50-100 7o Oz-saturation, 6 mg l-r NO: -N, 0 mg l-r NHa*, and I x 106 bac-
teria ml-r. GROLIERE (19':.7) recorded it at 1.6 mg f r NH4*-N; higher concentrations were avoided.
7t0

Colpodea
JACK & GILBERT (1993b) observed thatBursaridiumpseudohursaria is not significantly more susceptible to
Daphnia pulex than to Keratella cochlearis. Other experiments showed that it can escape the tentacles of the suc-
torian Tokophrya lemnarum (KENT I 985).
Ecological summary: Common, euplanktonic species recorded from Eurasia only; usually not very abundant.
Occurs throughout the year, however, cold seasons possibly preferred. Oligo-stenohaline. As an algae feeder, B.
pseudobursaria probably prefers eutrophic, but not saprobic conditions. Saprobic classification according to
FOISSNER et al. (1991): oligosaprobic to betamesosaprobic (o = 6, b = 4,1= 3, SI = 1.4).
CV
Bursari.dium pseudobursaria ( l, fiom FAURE-FREMIET 1924; 2, from KAHL 1932; 3, fiom VUXANOVICI 196l; 4,
fTomFOISSNER 1993; 4a-c,originalsof apopulationfromtheHöglwörtherSeeinBavaria.. 1-3,invivo; 4,protargolim-
pregnation; 4a-c, scanning electron micrographs). 1-3: Ventral views, 130 pm, 130,5tm,205 pm. Note large, horn-shaped
vestibulum. 4: Ventral view showing macronucleus and huge oral apparatus with deep vestibulum. 4a-c: Ventral, right lar
eral, and oblique frontal view. Note deep vestibular cleft (arrows) on ventral side and large vestibulum. AM = adoral or-
ganelles, CO = circumoral ciliary ribbon formed by narrowly spaced cilia at anterior end of somatic ciliary rows, CV =
contractile vacuole, E = extrusomes, MA = macronucleus, V = vestibulum.
7tt

Colpodea
w
*t. .* t;
w:I
t,!!ii,::1, t,,Mr:, ,,*,*, " WtW, '%,'"'1t
tutr I
Bursaridium pseudobursaria (5 14, flom FOISSNER 1993; 5-10, electronic llash illun.rinated phase contrast micrograplrs; ll, silvel car'-
bonate impregnation; l2 14, scanning electron micrographs). 5-9: Freely motile, cultivated specimens from a Norwegian lake. Note high
variability of body shape. 10: Released extrusomes are very hyaline. 11: Somatic ciliary pattern on right vestibular wall. The cilia are
tightly spaced at the anterior end of the rows. 12, 13: Ventral views showing huge oral opening and location of excretory pore. Specimen
in (13) deciliated to show details of body shape and the extraordinarily large excretory pore of the contractile vacuole. 14: Right lateral
view showing loose ciliation and slight dorsoventral flattening. CO = circumoral ciliary ribbon formed by narrowly spaced cilia at anterior
endofsomaticciliaryrows,E=extrusomes,EP=excretoryporeofcontractilevacuole,l=leftwallofvestibulum,r=rightwallofvesti-
bulum, V = vestibulum.
712

Colpodea
-* '"
I :',:.:i'.i::l:
...'§111
,iii: : ,;. :, ;";",..i.,'.i..r,, it,s\ .ro,,*:s:)i'l.1l\:ifsS
p,,'11i»,";.tlil.i
.i".':'',",::, ., ., , ", .; .,," .: ,:, '1 :; .. ".' '. .,. :, 1" , :,-, ,, , :,,. ,,' ! :, , :,,' : ,; ., . 'r:', ::, I,, :i ::, l:. :. :: , i:, :-r ;, :t' :'. 1; .:." l . 1'."i, :;i, . ":i, -i :i: l i:li: : *: l, :- i $1r ':.1: üi. '1,:,j i il ,l1§ 6sir ll '\ii ri [\\1i .\ i \\\ l i: i§ :\ \ !,:i. ll\ lil «\ rf\ '\\\ r\ '\i Nil§ Nt rli'§ r :,{§ iiii\ i.:ii§ §l. i§rl5 :\+§l \ :§ :N : i.\*- i§\ * +s\§f$ j:i
:. :rf ä,f \i iIi :- ri. :. '.ii, '' "j ::* ,' "'" n -' .o
. '- M :, : :N :: N : :; :\ j:Nr \u t, §f ,, f r, , r: . i: '1 :: . '' :i ':: ' -' , :: ! : '. '.. . . .;.. :.", :. : .: t: .:i: j :i, .ir =: ::, ir, ::., ii: 'i :., .l i: i ::, I ii: :r :, :" : :: ::. :i :. :i :'. :, j .' : :i i :. ::i *N.l=-i*' '
:1 1
.
.l],'r,,1.,
l.*:::::iiiiii
. i,,:::r:::::.+j\:mit:::.i.\iN. ..
." *,,,...:1..i* ,t' $,,, N:r§ \. \' \§ \§ \: \r
5 "'i": 'i:: .'.,. :i§ i:"': *i+ iiri l!'i:!:!:!..ii+\!ill:i\Niii:' i g..;.... *..,*" Nr.§"'ri+ .:t. l... B..uSNN 1:.. 9.: r ri:li:ä. i. ':l :i..lii
§
llii:,:i:i:tl:it i
L,..t:iit ii:it:
i s :::::: :+ * . | : " :: :+I:i:i: ::i.: i' : :::i:: * i:,..:.: .::ä1 S...,:,i *i i ,: ,.*::,r':'i .i,l:: ::: ,:!.N :,\:s:\:i t:i:i i1:l:§,,Nii:(i:l.l\i\§N\il i . ::i :r ii: :i :ir .t ir ii ri "i ' : j':: :.:.' ::, :::,, ::i,i. ,:,:, ,:,:, .i:i: i,iilr il\:\\ :,',:\ ,::'\ ', .: .,: ,,,i ',:i !::,' \':, \'j,i, 'i,t: :ä,i :il:" l:§iii \:\ \i\\\i \:\. l\:\ i\\]Iili:.::i.i- :'::- ::. ,:N :':':\ ,i\ :
Bursaridium pseudobursaria (15, original of a populatiorr li'orr a tbrest pond near the town ol'Salzburg; 16, from BERG
& SAND 1994; l'l-19, originals of a population from a lake [Höglwörther See] in Bavaria. 15, 16, scanning electron mi-
crographs; l7-19, silver carbonate impregnation). 15: Oblique right lateral view showing huge vestibular opening with
ventral cleft (arrow). 16: Ventral view showing transversely truncated anterior end, ventral cleft of oral apparatus (arrow),
and large excretory pore (arrowhead) of contractile vacuole which is, in this Norwegian population, distinctly more posteri-
orly than in another Scandinavian strain (Fig. l3). 17 , 18: Ciliature of anterior body portion. Arrows mark widely, ciliated
basal bodies of the undulating membrane, which is close above a dense circumoral ciliary ribbon formed by the anterior
end of the somatic ciliary rows. Arrowheads denote sharply impregnated fibres originating from the adoral organelles and
lining the vestibulum (evaginated due to staining procedure). 19: Proximal adoral organelles. CO = circumoral ciliary rib-
bon, V = vestibulum.
7t3

Colpodea
Colpoda steinü MAUPAS, 1883
1883 Colpoda steiniiMAUPAS, Archs Zool. exp. g6n., 1: 436 (partim; Planche 19, Fig. 7-10).
1884 Tillina saprophila STOKES, Am. Nat., 18:131(synonym).
1908 Colpoda steiniMAUPAS, emend. - ENRIQUES, Archs ZooL exp. g6n., 8: I I (authoritative redescription).
l93l Colpoda steini MAUPAS I 883 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl., 2li 219, 281 (revision).
1940 Colpoda steinii MAUPAS - BURT, Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 59: 421 (redescription).
1976 Colpoda steiniiMAUPAS, 1883 - LYNN, J. Protozool., 23:304 (silver impregnation).
l98O Paracolpoda steinii (MAUPAS, 1883) - FOISSNER, Zool. Jb. Sysr., 107: 412 (silver impregnation).
l99l Colpoda steinii MAUPAS, 1883 - FOISSNER, BLATTERER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informations-
berichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, U91: 390 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and
ecological monograph).
1993 Colpoda steinii MAUPAS, 1883 - FOISSNER, Prorozoenfauna, 4ll: 108 (detailed revision).
Nomenclature and taxonomy
"Colpoda steini" is a very common incorrect subsequent spelling. This species has, according to FOISSNER
(1993), two further synonyms, namely C. duodenaria TAYLOR & FURGASON and C. dragescoi CHARDEZ.
Paracolpoda LYNN has been abandoned by FOISSNER (1993) because of its doubtful taxonomic status at the
present stae of knowledge.
Differential diagnosis
l) Size in vivo 10-60 pm, usually 20-40 x 15-30 pm.
2) Body usually slightly reniform, dorsal (right) margin more or less distinctly convex, ventral (left) straight
and slightly indented at oral apparatus, that is, somewhat above mid-body. Keel (ventral margin above oral
apparatus) straight to slightly receding dorsally or projecting somewhat ventrally, with 5-7 notches (Fig.
l-1 , 13, 15, 16). Starved specimens hyaline and strongly flattened (about 2: I ), well-nourished cells dark and
almost unflattened (Fig. la).
3) Macronucleus slightly underneath mid-body, ellipsoidal, contains large nucleolus easily recognizable in
live, slightly squeezed specimens (Fig. l, 6, 12, 14, 17 ,21).
4) Contractile vacuole in posterior end (Fig. I , 6, 9, l3),
5) Extrusomes along ciliary rows recognizable only after protargol impregnation (Fig. 21).
6) 10-13, usually 12 curved ciliary rows composed of basal body pairs; both basal bodies ciliated at least in
anterior body third. Two caudal cilia about half as long as body, difficult to recognize in vivo because very
motile. Third ciliary row right of oral apparatus slightly shortened posteriorly, ciliature distinctly reduced in
left posterior area (details only recognizable with interference contrast optics or after silver impregnation,
not necessary for identification; Fig. 6,8-12,15, 16, 19,20).
7) Oral apparatus in anterior third ofcell, notches ventral side slightly to fairly distinctly. Left oral ciliary field in-
variably spoon-shaped (well recognizable in live, slightly squeezed specimens), consists of 8-12 short basal
bodyrowswithciliaextendingbeyondbodyproper,formingdistinct"beard"(Fig. 1,6, 1,10 11,13-15,20,
2t).
B) Swims and glides rather rapidly.
Similar species
Although some rather similar species exist, for example, Colpoda ecaudata (LIEBMANN), C. steinii is easily
identified by the large, central nucleolus (character 3) and the spoon-shaped left oral ciliary field (character 7).
714

Colpodea
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Only occasionally abundant in plankton, but very common in terrestrial habitats
(soil, moss). The locus classicus is in Algeria, where MAUPAS (1883) discovered Colpoda steinii in a hay infu-
sion. There are many, predominantly terrestrial records from all over the world, compiled by FOISSNER (1993).
Here, we provide only planktonic records: excavated pond in Styria, Austria (KRAINER 1988); in Lake Con-
srance, Germany, with fairly high abundan ce at a depth of 8 m (FOISSNER 1993); Lake Geneva (ANDRE I 9 14);
eutrophic lake (Heiliges Meer) in Germany (MÜCKE 1979); common and abundant (up to 16 000 ind. l-r) in Lake
Kinneret, Israel, during May, November and December (HADAS & BERMAN 1998, HADAS et al. 1992,
SHERR et al. 1991); waters in Moldavian SSR (CHORIK 1968); 600-1520 ind. ml-r in Siberian lakes (LOKOT
1987); eutrophic Lake Donghu, China, during summer and autumn (GONG 1986); lakes in Colorado, USA
(HAMILTON 1943). Also in running waters, for example, the Danube River in Hungary (BERECZKY 1911a)
and the Amper River in Bavaria (FOISSNER 1993). Occasionally in sewage treatment plants (e.g. ALONSO et al.
l98l ).
Autecotogical data: Feeds mainly on bacteria (FOISSNER 1993), but also on small cyanobacteria like Anar:ys-
tis nidulans and Synet:hococcus sp. (BADER et al. 1916, SHERR et al. 199 l). Biomass of 106 specimens
3-5 mg (BUITKAMP 1979, FOISSNER 1987a, MUSAEV & IBADOV 1980). SHERR et al. (1991) found a
generation time of 4.5 h for a planktonic population from Lake Kinneret and a growth efficiency of 48 o/o.
PROPER & GARVER (1966), using hay extract as medium and Escheric'hia c'oli as food, established the fol-
lowing characteristics at 30o C: generation time 4-5 h, average yield J8 7o, maximum specific growth rate
0.23 ht, dry mass 1.2 x 10-6 mg cell-r. Respiration of trophonts 0.0845 nl Oz cell-r h I (FENCHEL & FINLAY
1983). SINGH (1941) found a generation time of l-36h, depending on quality of food and density of culture.
Autecological data -+ Table.
Table: Autecological data of Colpoda steinü. Column 1, from (FOISSNER et al. I 9tl2; 6 analyses fiom three pasture ponds in the Austrian
Alps); column 2, from DETCHEV A (1912, 1919a, 1983a, c; many analyses fiom Bulgarian rivers); column 3, tiom BICK (1968lr, 1972b
at least 100 analyses from natural and artiflcial water bodies).
Parameters References
I 2 .a)
TemperatLlre (" C) 1.0-14.4 10.6-24.5 l 0-40
pH 4. B-5 . t) 1 .t-7 .8 4.0-L) .5
o, (mg I ') 5.t -9.9 4.2-12.8 0-r0
Oz (saturation 7o) 10-123 49-t)tJ
BODs (rng I r) 1-102
KMnO+ consumption (mg I ') 49-s3 4-426
H:S (rng I r) 0-0.5
Total hardness (dH') 0. B-2.0 6.4- r 3.5
PO+3 -P (mg I ') 0-0.02
NH+*-N (rng I r) 0-0.8 0-1 1.6 0-93. l
NO: -N (rng I r) 0 0-1 0-6.8
NO: -N (mg I ') 0 0-0.3 0- 10.9
Bacteria ml-r (x 106; direct count) 0.03-1 2.5-135
Ecological summary: Recorded from mainly terrestrial habitats worldwide, not very common in plankton.
Feeds on bacteria, in lakes also on small cyanobacteria. Eurythermic and oligo- to meso-euryhaline. Becomes
abundant under low competition because of its r-selected survival strategy. Resting cysts known (Fig. 18).
Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et al. (1991): alphamesosaprobic to polysaprobic (SI = 3.5), re-
spectively, beta- to alphamesosaprobic (SI = 2.3), depending on abundance and chemical characteristics.
lt5

Colpodea
OA
MA
-NU
-Mt
l-"r.
RO \;r't
LO t\\\ RO
/:,/\
LO
t
il
,r' i
,'r'
*ffi.'__:il
dr;., oo . _- tl,
i" ". ro at .a- lL
,'i«rrilfrl
Colpoda steinü (l*3, afier MAUPAS l8iJ3; 4, l'ronr KAHL l9ll; -5, li'onr BURT 1940; 6, ll, 12, f}om FOISSNER 1993;
7, from CORLISS 1956; 8-10, from LYNN 1976; 13, 14, originals. l-7, 13, 14, in vivo; 8-10, Chatton-Lwoff silver nitrate
impregnation; 11, 12, protargol impregnation). 1-7: Right and lett (2, 3) lateral views, 2l-48 pm.8-10: Ciliary pattern and
silverline system of right, left, and ventral side, length about 30 pm. 11, l2z Ciliary pattern of right and left side and nu-
clear apparatus,3l prm. 13, 14: Squeezed specimens showing main organelles, such as macronucleus with large, ellipsoidal
nucleolus (arrowhead) and serrated keel (arrow). B = beard (ci1ia of spoon-shaped left oral ciliary field), CA = caudal cilia,
CV = contractile vacuole, EP = excretory pore of contractile vacuole, LO = left oral ciliary field, MA = macronucleus, MI
= micronucleus, NU = nucleolus, OA = oral apparatus, RO = right oral ciliary field.
7t6



Colpodea
C yrtolopho sis mucicola sroKES, 1 88s
1885 Cyrtolophosis mucicola STOKES, Am. Nat., 19:439.
1889 Balantiophorus minutus SCHEWIAKOFF, Biblthca zool., 1: 64 (synonym).
1922 Cyrtolophosis mucicola STOKES 1885 - PENARD, Etudes Infusoires, p. 117 (detailed redescription).
1931 Cyrtolophosis mucicola STOKES, 1888 - KAHL, Tierwelt Dtl.,2l: 354 (first reviser).
1978 Cyrtolophosis mucicola STOKES, 1885 - FOISSNER, Acta Protozool., 17: 217 (redescription after sil-
ver impregnation).
1987 CyrtolophosismucicolaSTOKES, 1885-FOISSNER,Zool.Beitr.,3l:249(authoritativeredescription).
1991 Cyrtolophosis mucicola STOKES, 1885 - FOISSNER, BLATTERER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Infor-
mationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, U9l: 414 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxo-
nomic and ecological monograph).
1993 Cyrtolophosis mucicola STOKES, 1885 - FOISSNER, Protozoenfauna,4ll: 529 (detalled revision).
Diilerent ial diagnosis
1) Size in vivo about l8-40 x 9-15 pm, usually 20-30 x 9-1 I pm, very flexible and about 30 %o of length con-
tractile.
2) Body ellipsoidal to ovoid, unflattened, distinctly excavated by oral apparatus in anterior third (Fig. 2a, b,
5-13, 18). Individuals swimming for longer periods usually become fusiform, those being contracted or de-
generating become stouter.
3) Macronucleus near mid-body, globular (Fig. 2a, 4-9, 16).
4) Contractile vacuole subterminal, that is, about one quarter of body length from posterior end (Fig. 2a, 3,
5-8,12,13, l9).
5) Extrusomes very small (<l pm), ellipsoidal, difficult to recognize in vivo. not necessary for identification;
form mucous dwelling-tube (Fig. 2a, 10, 14) and voluminous coat in specimens treated with iodized Indian
ink.
6) 7-1 1, usually 9 or 10 slightly spiratly coursing ciliary rows composed of basal body pairs; postorally, single
and paired cilia may irregularly alternate (recognizable only with interference contrast optics or after silver
impregnation, not necessary for identification; Fig.2a,3,4, 16, 17).
7) Oral apparatus in anterior third of cell, aperture triangular. On teft slope of buccal cavity four minute adoral
organelles (membranelles) bearing about 10 pm lo.ng cilia (Fig. 2a,3, 70, 13, 16). Undulating membrane at
right wall of buccal cavity. anterior portion with'12-14 pm long cilia typically forming distinct, ventrally
curved bundle (Fig. 2a, 3, 5-12, 16, 18, 19).
8) Lives usually in mucous, often less than 100 pm long tube, which is colourless and very hyaline and thus
recognizable only due to attached bacteria and debris (Fig. 2a, 5,1-9, 10, 14). Tubes occasionally up to
500 pm long, curved worm-like, or (rarely) brown due to ferric incrustations (Fig. 15). Often several tubes
form a colony (Fig. 1a). Undisturbed specimens move hastily to and fro within the tubes, which is so char-
acteristic that this tiny species is easily recognized even at low (100x) magnification. Unfortunately, dis-
turbed cells (e.g., due to handling of sample) leave the tube and swim very rapidly, but will usually com-
mence to build a new tube within half an hour.
Similar species
Cyrtolophosis elongata (SCHEWIAKOFF, 1892) differs from C. mucicola in the terminal location of the con-
tractile vacuole, the absence of a dwelling-tube, the lower number (7 or 8 against usually 9 or 10) of ciliary
rows, and the lateral flattening (Fig. la). Cyrtolophosis bursaria (SCHEWIAKOFF, 1892), an insufficiently de-
scribed and possibly synonymous species, is broadly ovoid (Fig. lb). Cyrtolophosis major KAHL, 1926 is
718

Colpodea
larger(35-45x 15pm; Fig. lc)andpossiblyajuniorsynonym of C.mucicola,roo. Detaileddescriptionof all
Cyrtolophosis species, see FOISSNER (1993). Inexperienced workers should not confuse it with small speci-
mens of the Tetrahymena pyriformrs complex or small scuticociliates, which have a rather different ciliature
and silverline system (see FOISSNER et al. 1994 for detailed description of these species). l, 4,7 (anterior cili-
ary tuft), 8 (tube) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Not very common in plankton, where it is usually attached to particulate or-
ganic matter; more frequent in benthic habitats of lakes and running waters; also in exotic biotopes such as tree
holes and pitchers of pitcher plants, where its abundance decreases with increasing number of mosquito larvae
(ADDICOTT 1974). However, in spite of extensive records from freshwater, Cyrtolophosis mucicola is most
common in terrestrial biotopes (FOISSNER 1993).
STOKES ( 1885a) discovered C. mucicola in an infusion of dead leaves from a river in the USA, probably near
Trenton, New Jersey, where he lived and worked. SCHEWIAKOFFIIS89) did not state the type location of
the synonym, but it was very common and abundant in almost every infusion. There are more than 100 records
available from all over the world (FOISSNER 1993). Here, we provide only planktonic findings: up to
7000 ind. l-r in the eutrophic Rimov Reservoir, Czech Republic, during mid-September, where it contributed
about 50 a/a of total ciliate abundance and biomass (-+ Ecogram [a] and Ecogram by Rimostrombidium hra-
chykinetum; MACEK et al. 1996, StVtBf et al. 1995,1996; identificarion checked by W. FOISSNER); Scioro
River, Ohio, USA (LACKEY 1938b); up to 2000 ind. l-r in the Duck River, Tennessee, USA (LACKEY
1942).
So far not reliably recorded from activated sludge and marine habitats; the records by DETCHEVA (1982),
SICK (1933), and TUCOLESCO (1962) from brackish waters of Bulgaria, Germany, and Romania being
doubtful exceptions because not substantiated by illustrations. Cyrtolophosis muc'icola has also been infre-
quently recorded from caves (GITTLESON & HOOVER 1969).
Autecological data: Feeds on bacteria (FOISSNER 1993), according to SIMEK et al. (1995) also on detritus.
Mean grazing rate (+ SD) 173 + 124 bacteria cell-r h-r and 2l +37 picocyanobacteria cell-r h-r; mean clearance
rate 51 nl cell-rhr for bacteria and 151 nl cellrhr for picocyanobacteria; ingestion of algae >2V^ 7 7o (3I-
MEK et al. 1996, -+ Ecogram b). Biomass of 106 specimens 1.6mg (MUSAEV & IBADOV 1980),2.0mg
(FOISSNER 1981a, c), and 2.9m9 (MACEK e al.1996; planktonic population). MACEK et al. (1996) calcu-
lated a growth rate of 0.42 + 0.39 d I (mean * SD) from abundance changes in the ÄJmov Reservoir.
BICK ( 1957) showed that Cyrtolophosis mucicola is a polystenooxybiontic ciliate building dwelling-tubes only
in cultures with low total salt concentrations. Later investigations confirmed this (e.g., FOISSNER et al. 1982,
who found mass development in astatic alpine pools with very low salt concentrations), but showed that the
ciliate can tolerate 37 g1t total salt of the bicarbonate type (ALBRECHT 1986, BICK 1961,1968). MÜNCH
(1970) found abundant populations of C. mucicola only at temperatures between 35-45" C and a wide tolerance
for many other abiotic factors. Likewise, WILBERT (1969) found C. mucic:ola as pioneer species only when
temperature rose to 30'C. HENEBRY & CAIRNS (1980), however, report a high pioneering rate even at tem-
peratures of about 20'C. That temperature is not a decisive factor for C. muc:icola is also apparent from the
autecological data (-+ Table), showing an occurrence under field conditions at a range of 0-27" C. GROLIERE
(1971) found highest abundances around 10" C in a Sphagnum bog. During summer, when water warmed to
20o C, its abundance decreased sharply. Similarly, pH is not a key-factor, although STOUT (1956) found no
growth between pH 5.2 andl.4, but only atpH4.4. DINGFELDER (1962), however, observed mass develop-
ment in track puddles at pH 6.4-7 .4. The field data by GROLIERE (1971) show that C. mut'it:ola became abun-
dant only when most other species declined. This corresponds with MÜNCH (1970) and our observations from
freshwater and soil biotopes. MÜNCH 11970) thus correctly concluded that mass developments of C. mucicola
depend mainly on the extinction of competitive species rather than on certain abiotic factors. This concurs with
the r-selected survival strategy of the colpodids in general (LÜFTENEGGER et al. 1985).
7t9

Colpodea
Table: Autecological data of Cyrtolophosis mucicola. Column 1, from FOISSNER et al. (1982;46 analyses from22 small, stagnant, al-
pine water bodies in Austria); column 2, from DETCHEVA (1912, 1978,1919a, 1983a--c; many analyses from Bulgarian running waters);
column 3, from BICK (1957,19681, at least 100 analyses from natural and artificial water bodies in Germany).
Parameters References
.)
I 2 J
Temperature (" C) 0.2-23.0 4-25 1 0-50
pH 1.7 -5.8 6.8-8.1 6.4-8.6
o, (mg I') 3-t3 3-t3 0-8.7
Oz (saturation 7o) 3l -17 8 39-t4-0
BoDs (mg I') r-13
KMnO+ coltsumption (mg I ') 4-100 r-r13
HzS (mg I') 0-(2?)
Total hardness (dH') 0.6-l 3-_t9
PO+3 -P (mg I ') 0-0.26
NH+*-N (mg l') 0-10. 0-3 0-t4
1 1
NO: -N (mg l') 0-0.5 0-6.6 0-2.3
NOz -N (mg l') 0-3.4 0-0.2
Bacteria ml ' (x 100) 0.02-20 0.00 t-2.s
(direct counting) (plate method)
Ecotogical summary: Recorded from all overthe world and agreat va.riety of habitats (soil, benthal, pelagial).
Dwelling-tubes of planktonic populations usually attached to organic debris. Occurs throughout the year, that is,
eurythermic and possibly holo-euryhaline. Feeds mainly on bacteria. r-selected and thus abundant only in the ab-
sence of competitors. Resting cysts known. Saprobic classification according to FOISSNER et al. (1991, 1995):
betamesosaprobic to polysaprobic (o = 1, b =2, a= 4,P = 3, I =1, SI = 2.9).
EPILIMNION
I
-C
abundance, cells ml- 1 alo- I H. grandineila Tqoher oligotrichsNscuticociliates
E fl Prostomatids ffi C. mucicola ffi Others
Cyrtolophosis mucicola
(d
ao-
#
C)
(ü
_o
(oo 16
()) 12
'Cil
(6
t*
(f)
(,)
20 25 301 15 .§
August a ö b
1993 September
voir samples incubated in the laboratory at in situ temperatures. Line with black arrows = epilimnion; tine with white arrows = metalim-
nion; arrows = growth. b: Proportion ofvarious ciliate groups in total ciliate bacterivory proportion in the epilimnion ofthe Ä.imov Reser-
voir from August l6 to September 22, 1993. Other oligotrichs: --s Rimostrombidium brachykinetum, Strobilidium sp. (large, about 35 pm),
oligotrich on Staurastrum. Scuticociliates: Cyclidium sp., Cinetochilum margaritaceum. Prostomatids: Urotricha spp. (>90 Vo -+ U. fur-
cata),small Urotricha, Balanion-like ciliate. Others: vorticellids, unidentified ciliates.
120

Colpodea
Cyrtolophosis species in vivo (from FOISSNER 1993). la:Cyrtolophosis elongata,26 pm. 1b:
Cyrtolophosis hursaria, 32 pm. lc: Cyrtolophosis major, 35 pm. ld: Cyrtolophosis bivacuo-
lata,22 Vm (very likely a dividin g C . elongata!).
rV
MA
i'üt
,
I-C V t '-j'!
l.
rl . o
,*!' I;: \,.o {. o =r Ll r
I
6
Cyrtolophosis mucicola (24,from FOISSNER 1987c, 1993; 5, fiom STOKES 1885a; 6, afier SCHEWIAKOFF 1889; 7, liom PENARD
1922;8, from KAHL l93l;9, from BARY 1950.2a, b,5-9, in vivo;3,4, protargol impregnation). 2a: Ventro-lateral and ventral view of
specimens inhabiting dwelling-tubes, cells about 30 pm long. 2b: Characteristic left lateral appearance, 28 pm. 3, 4: Ciliary pattem of ven-
tral and dorsal side and nuclear apparatus, 20 pm. Arrow marks excretory pore of contractile vacuole. 5, 6: Right and left lateral views,
26'pm,29 pm. Small arrow marks apical ciliary tuft, large arrow denotes contractile vacuole. T-9: Right lateral views,2lpm,28pm,
25 pm. Arows mark curved apical ciliary tuft. AM = adoral membranelles (organelles), CV = contractile vacuole, FV = food vacuole, MA
= macronucleus, UM = undulating membrane.
721

Colpodea
:::::::::::::j:::;:::::: :.::: :
W"t"t,"".
,:::::ll ii::::, li.,,ll;ii] l
,...........'...*.
|ffi,,
,,ffit '
a
,ffi:
'#'i'
N.,
:::::,:
:!.
+ $q
i,
Cyrtolophosis mucicola (10-17, IIom FOISSNER 1993; lu, 19, originals. l0-15, 18, 19, ir.r vivo; 16, silver carbonate impregnation; 17,
Klein-Foissner silver nitrate impregnation). 10, 11: Right lateral views of specimens inhabiting mucous tubes (vertical lines = inner tube
margins). Small arrow marks curved anterior ciliary tuft, large arrow denotes oral aperture. 12, 13: Slightly contracted specimens in very
hyaline tubes. Small arrow in (12) marks anterior ciliary tuft; small arrow in (13) denotes pocket-like right vestibular wall, large arrows
mark contractile vacuole. 14: Colony with seven individuals (arrows) in tubes heavily colonized with bacteria. 15: Brown (by fenic in-
crustations), deserted tubes (arrows). 16: Ciliary pattem of ventral side. Small arrows denote adoral organelles, large arrow marks short
ciliary row. 17: Silverline system. Arrows mark bipartite undulating membrane. 18, 19: Freely motile and slightly contracted specimen.
Arrowhead marks contractile vacuole. AM = adoral organelles, MA = macronucleus, UM = undulating membrane.
122

4.4.6 Suctoria cr-epeRBoE & LACHMANN, l8s8
The Suctoria are characterizedby four features (FOISSNER et al. 1995, p. 395): (i) Usually, the adult specimens
are unciliated and sessile, except for most planktonic species (-+ Mucophrya pelagica, -+ Staurophrya elegans,
-+ Gajewskajophrya melosirae); (ii) A ordinary oral apparatus is lacking in all stages of the life cycle, which
comprises the adult, the swarmer, and the cyst; (iii) Most species have contractile tentacles during the adult stage
(some species also during the swarmer stage). Prey is attacked and ingested via the tentacles, which often have a
knobbed distal end bearing special extrusomes, the haptocysts; (iv) Suctorians reproduce by ciliated swarrners,
which develop by endogenous or exogenous budding. Some species have a "reactive" swarmer formation, that is,
the adult transforms into a swarmer.
Most suctorians live benthically or in the aufwuchs of running and stagnant waters, a considerable number is epi-
biontic on beetles, and only few species live euplanktonic or in soil; rarely, they parasitize other ciliates. Some
suctorians produce loricas, which are used for the characterization of species and genera. Several species, espe-
cially the planktonic ones, make highly characteristic resting cysts. The suctorians are voracious predators,
mainly feeding on other ciliates, which are, on contacting a tentacle, immediately immobilized by the haptocysts.
The tentacles contain tube-like configurations of microtubules, which are possibly homologous to the nematodes-
mal fibres of an ordinary oral basket (cyrtos). The freshwater and brackish water suctorians were recently revised
by MATTHES (1988).
Mucophrya pelagica GAJEVSKAJA , tezs
1928 Mucophrya pelagica GAJEVSKAJA, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 20: 478.
1933 Mucophrya pelagica GAJEWSKAJA - GAJEWSKAJA, Zoologica, Stuttg., 32: 212 (detailed description
and ecological characterization).
1988 Mucophrya pelagica GAJEWSKAJA 1928 - MATTHES, Protozoenfauna,T ll: 188 (revision).
Differential diagnosis
l)
Size without mucous layer and tentacles in vivo 65-1 10 pm, mucous layer 4V7O pm thick, large specimens
across.
in total thus 150-180 pm
i
2) Body irregularly shaped, usually rounded triangular or cordiform, bearing about 40-50, more or less regularly
distributed tentacles. Tentacles up to 200 pm Iong with distal end knobbed. No lorica, no stalk. Cell covered
by colourless, two-layered mucous envelope (Fig. 1). Resting cysts parachute-shaped, about 130 pm across
(Fie.2).
3) Macronucleus near body centre, globular (Fig. 1). Two small, spherical micronuclei.
4) Contractile vacuole near body margin (Fig. 1).
5) Cytoplasm yellowish, without peculiarities; not conspicuously vacuolized.
6) Adult specimens without cilia.
7) Ordinary oral apparatus replaced by long tentacles, which attack and ingest prey organisms (Fig. 1).
8) Floating in the pelagial.
Similar species
Monotypic genus, that is, only one species known. -+ Staurophrya elegans, which is more common, lacks a
mucous coat, has six roundish protrusions, each bearing 12-30 tentacles, and the resting cyst is sombrero-shaped.
123

Suctoria
-+ Gajewskajophryta melosirae lacks a mucous layer, has 6-12 bundles of tentacles, and is attached to Melosira
filaments (Fig. 3). Confusion with non-suctorian ciliates unlikely, however, inexperienced workers may confuse
M. pelagica with heliozoans (usually globular, tentacles [axopods] granulated, cytoplasm usually strongly vacu-
olized; details see SIEMENSMA l99l). 2 (shape, mucous layer, tentacles present), 5 (cytoplasm not vacuolized)
and 8 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: As yet found only at type location, that is, the pelagial (up to a depth of 500 m!)
of Lake Baikal with peaks from June to August; almost lacking during autumn and early winter, rare from Janu-
ary to April. Although sometimes extremely abundant (up to 15 000 ind. ml-r!) in the open lake, active specimens
never occurred in shallow sites. Resting cysts present throughout the year and even in shallow bays, with a dis-
linct peak during early spring.
Autecological data and ecological summary: Food not known, probably ciliates. Biomass of 106 specimens
about 170 mg. GAJEWSKAJA (1933) fotnd Mucophrya pelagica at following conditions: 0-5.2" C,pH7.2-7.6,
9.1-12.1mg 1-r Oz, 0.44-5.06 mg l-' COz, 22.2-25.3 mg l-r CaO, 3.H.8 mg 1r MgO, 1.00-2.44 mg l-r SiOz. She
characterized M. pelagica as a euplanktonic, stenotopic, stenoxybiontic, cold-stenothermic species. Possibly en-
demic in Lake Baikal. Resting cyst formation known. Oligosaprobic (FOISSNER 1988a).
G-/--?ä)\-..
2
Mucophrya pelagica in vivo ( I , 2, trom MATTHES 1988, redrawn from GAJEWSKAJA I 933). l: Adult specimen, diame-
ter of cell 65-110 pm. Usually, the tentacles are scattered over the cell, however, occasionally they are grouped to small
bundles. The tentacles, which are up to 200 pm long, contract and extend very fast without being impeded by the two-
layered mucous envelope. Arrowhead marks macronucleus, arrow denotes contractile vacuole.2: Resting cyst, 130 x 35 pm.
The parachute-shaped cyst is very transparent. vitreous, and has two walls. The upper convex wall is smooth, the lower con-
cave wall has a undulated margin (not shown in this redrawing). During excystment, the cell (about 30 pm across) slips out
of the cyst through an opening 35-40 pm across in the upper wall. The characteristic mucous layer is formed very quickly,
immediately after excystment.
-+ Gajewskajophrya melosirae in vivo (3, from MATTHES 1988, redrawn from GAJEWSKAJA 1933). 3: Specimen with
extended tentacles attached to the planktonic diatom Melosira. Diameter of cell 60-90 prm. Detailed description, see next
pages.
724

Suctoria
G aj e w s kaj o phry a me lo sirae (cAJEwsKAJA, 1 e33) MATTHES, l 988
1933 Sphaerop hrya me lo sirae GAJEWSKAJA, Zoologica, Stuttg., 32: 216.
1988 Gajewskajophrya melosirae GAJEWSKAJA 1933 - MATTHES, Protozoenfauna,'717: 179 (revision; see
taxonomy).
Taxonomy
MATTHES (1988) established Gajewskajophryawithout sufficient evidence. In spite of this, we recognize the
genus because of the epiplanktonic life style of G. melosirae. Resting cyst not known, possibly lacking.
Dilferent ial diagnosis
l) Size without tentacles in vivo about 50-90 pm.
2) Body roughly polyhedron-shaped, each of the 6*12 angles with a bundle of up to 12 tentacles (Fig. l-4);
rarely occur specimens with only 4 bundles diametrically arranged (Fig. 3 by -+ Mucophrya pelagica). Ten-
tacles up to 300 pm long with distal end knobbed (Fig. l-a). No lorica, no stalk.
3) Macronucleus in body centre, globular (Fig. 1, 4).
4) Two contractile vacuoles opposed (Fig. l, a).
5) Cytoplasm without peculiarities; not conspicuously vacuolized.
6) Adult specimens without cilia.
7) Ordinary oral apparatus replaced by long tentacles, which attack and ingest prey organisms (Fig. 1-4).
8) Epibiontic on planktonic algae, especially diatoms, such as Melosira and Fragilaria (Fig. 14).
Similar species
Monotypic genus, that is, only one species known. -+ Staurophrya elegans (50-65 pm; roundish protrusions,
each with 12-30 lentacles) and -+ Mucophrya pelagica (with distinct mucous envelope and scattered tentacles)
are not epiplanktonic but floating (euplanktonic) in the pelagial. 2 (shape, tentacles present) and 8 (epibiontic on
planktonic algae) are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Literature not fully screened because species included only during final stage of
review preparation. Euplanktonic in lakes. GAJEWSKAJA (1933) discovered G. melosirae in the pelagial
(M00 m) of Lake Baikal, where it was invariably attached to the filamentous diatoms Melosira baikalensis and
M. binderana. It occurred throughout the year peaking during June and July, when water temperature was still
Iow; when the surface water warmed above 8-10'C, it disappeared. Philipp MAYER (pers. comm.) found G.
melosirae attached to Fragilaria crotonensis in Lake Constance during September (Fig.2a).
Autecological data and ecological summary: Very likely feeds on heterotrophic protists. Biomass of 106
middle-sized specimens about l50mg. Cold-stenothermic (GAJEWSKAJA 1933). The pH (12.04-12.20) and
the oxygen range (12.04-10.20 mg l-') provided by GAJEWSKAJA (1933) are probably wrong. Reliably re-
corded from Europe and Asia only. Epibiontic on planktonic diatoms.
725



Suctoria
Staurophrya ele gans zACHARTAS, 1 893
1893 Staurophrya elegans ZACHARIAS, ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 1: 18.
1903 Staurophrya elegans ZACHARIAS, ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 10: 312 (additional observations).
l9l2 Staurophrya elegans ZACHARIAS (1893) - COLLIN, Archs Zool. exp. g6n., 5l:382 (revision).
1933 Staurophrya elegans ZACHARIAS - GAJEWSKAJA, Zoologica, Stuttg., 32: 196 (detailed redescription).
1972 Staurophryaelegans ZACHARIAS 1893-BICK,Binnengewässer,26:80(guidetoplanktonciliates).
1985 Staurophrya elegans - SANDHALL & BERGGREN, Planktonkunde, p. 69 (colour micrograph).
1985 Staurophrya elegans ZACHARIAS - NAEF & MARTIN, Archs Sci., Genöve, 38: 196 (micrograph of
cyst).
1988 Staurophrya elegans ZACHARIAS 1893 - MATTHES, Protozoenfauna,'7ll: 43 (revision).
1995 Staurophrya elegans ZACHARIAS, 1893 - FOISSNER, BERGER & KOHMANN, Informationsberichte
des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, U95: 420 ("Ciliate-Atlas", that is, taxonomic and ecologi-
cal monograph).
Differential diagnosi
s
1) Size without tentacles in vivo about 50-65 pm.
2) Body with 6 rather regularly arranged, roundish protrusions, each bearing l2-3O tentacles. Tentacles up to
300 pm long with distal end indistinctly knobbed. No lorica, no stalk (Fig. 1, 5, 8). Resting cysts sombrero-
shaped (Fi5.2,6, 7), during excystment formed like a gyroscope (Abb. 3, 4).
3) Macronucleus in body centre, spherical (Fig. 5, 8).
4) One (occasionally 2) contractile vacuole (Fig. 8).
5) Cytoplasm without peculiarities; not conspicuously vacuolized.
6) Adult specimens without cilia; swarmers (50 pm long) ovoid with ciliated anterior end.
7) Ordinary oral apparatus replaced by long tentacles, which attack and ingest prey organisms (Fig. 1, 5, 8).
8) Floating in the pelagial.
Similar species
Monotypic genus, that is, only one species known. -+ Gajewskajophrya melosirae has 6-12 bundles of tentacles
and is attached to Melosira filaments. -+ Mucophrya pelagica has a distinct mucous envelope, scattered
tentacles, and a parachute-shaped resting cyst. Confusion with non-suctorian ciliates unlikely, however, inexperi-
enced workers may confuse S. elegans with heliozoans (usually globular, that is, without roundish protrusions;
tentacles [axopods] granulated; cytoplasm usually strongly vacuolized; details see SIEMENSMA 1991).2
(shape, tentacles present), 5 (cytoplasm not vacuolized) and 8 are key characters for identification.
Ecology
Occurrence and distribution: Euplanktonic in lakes and slowly running rivers. Hibernates, very likely, usually
as cyst (GAJEWSKAIA 1933, MATTHES 1988). Locus classicus is a lake in Germany (Großer Plöner See),
where ZACHARIAS (1893) found up to 99433Staurophrya elegans per square metre during February and
April; in late April and May ZACHARIAS (1903a) found adults and resting cysts, while during the warm sum-
mer months adult specimens were absent.
Records from stagnant and slowly running waters: mesoffophic alpine lake (Mondsee) in Upper Austria
(SALBRECHTER & ARNDT 1994); oligotrophic lake in Germany (SCHÖNBORN 1985); Lake Constance, Ger-
many (WEISSE & MÜLLER 1990); abundant in a lake of northern Germany during February (APSTEIN 1893)
727

-Suctoria
and in other lakes of the same region during April and May (VOIGT 1902); slightly eutrophic reservoir in Ger-
many during May and June (BEUSCHOLD 196l); in Hamburg Harbour and Elbe Estuary, Germany (BARTSCH
& HARTWIG 1984, CASPERS & SCHULZ 1964, SCHULZ 1961, TENT 1981); with iow abundance in an
alphamesosaprobic reservoir in Germany (NUSCH 1970); abundant in a lake of an Italian cave (STELLA & SAL-
VADORI 1953); active and encysted specimens during April in Lake Geneva, Switzerland (NAEF 1995, NAEF &
MARTIN 1985, 1993a,1994, NAEF etal. 1996; Fig. 1,2); brackish karst lake in Yugoslavia (PETKOVIÖ &
PETKOVIÖ 1978); lakes in Scandinavia (ELORANTA 1980, PEJLER 1964); fishponds (MORDUKHAJ-BOL-
TOVSKAJA 1965) and reservoirs in the USSR (MYLNIKOVA 1981, ZHUKOV & MAMAEVA 1978); in Lake
Baikal down to 200 m, and especially in the warm (max. 18.6'C), plankton-rich bays (GAJEWSKAJA 1933; Fig.
4,6-8).
Records from potamoplankton: Danube River (up to 21 ind.lr; BERECZKY 1969), Oka River (SASSUCHIN
1924), Wjatka River (SKORIKOW l9O2), betamesosaprobic Volga River during spring (e.g., MAMAYEVA
1975,ZYKOFF 1902); with low abundance in mesosaprobic sites of the Schwalm River, Germany (HEUSS et
al. 1972). Records from sewage treatment plants not substantiated by illustrations (e.g., KUTIKOWA 1984).
Autecological data: Feeds on ciliates (BICK l9l2a, GAJEWSKAJA 1933) and perhaps on diatoms (ZACHA-
RIAS 1893). Biomass of 106 specimens about ll0mg (FOISSNER et al. 1995). Eurythermic (GAJEWSKAJA
1933); however, increasing temperature and ammonium decrease population density significantly (NOSEK &
BERECZKY 1994,ZACHARIAS 1903a). GAJEWSKAJA (1933) found the following limits of occurrence in
Lake Baikal: 3.5-18.6" C,pH7.3-7.6,1.1-11.8 mg l-r Oz.
Ecological summary: Recorded from Eurasia only. Euplanktonic, probably prefers cold, oligotrophic or meso-
trophic waters, usually predaceous and sparse, hibernates as cyst. Saprobic classification according to FOISS-
NERetal.(1995):oligosaprobictoalphamesosaprobic(o=3,b-4,a=3, I=2,SI=2.0).
2
Staurophrya elegans (originals kindly supplied by Prof.
NAEF, University of Geneva. l, in vivo phase contrast
micrograph; 2, in vivo bright field micrograph). l, 2: Ac-
tive and encysted specimen from Lake Geneva. Arrows in
( 1) mark indistinctly knobbed distal end of tentacles.
728

Suctoria
MA
-TT
cv_
.-
Staurophrya elegans in vivo (3, 5, tiom ZACHARIAS 1893, I 894; 4, 6-8, fiom GAJEWSKAJA 1933). 3, 4, 6,7: Resting
cysts. Figures 3 and 4 show excysting specimens. 5, 8: Adult specimens, 50-65 pm across without tentacles. Arrows in (8)
mark contracted tentacles. CV = contractile vacuole, MA = macronucleus, TT = tentacles.
729



5
GLOSSARY TO CILIATE MORPHOLOGY
The glossary contains mainly general terms used in this book. Most group-specific terms are explained in the in-
troduction to the corresponding group or there where they are used. For more detailed glossaries, see CORLISS
(19'79), CORLISS & LOM (1985), and HAUSMANN & HÜLSMANN (1996).
adoral zone of membranelles: -+ membranelles.
,
adoral organelles: compound ciliary structures belonging to the oral apparatus; in our book only used for the
-+ membranelles of the -+ prostomatids.
alveolus (p/. alveoli): flattened vesicle or sac, bounded by a unit membrane, lying just beneath the surface or
plasma membrane of the cell.
anlage: a developing, differentiating, or even presumptive structure or -+ organelle. The anlage of the -+ oral
apparatus, for example, is often composed of an irregular accumulation of -+ basal bodies.
argyrome: -+ silverline system.
basal body: subpellicularly located, about 1.2 x 0.3 pm sized microtubular structure, from which the cilium
originates, homologous to the metazoan centriole; usually associated with several types of -+ fibres and
bundles of microtubules; often arranged in pairs (= dikinetids, for example in the -+ colpodids or in the -+
dorsal brush of the -+ gymnostomatids) or groups (for example, -; cirri and -> adoral membranelles of -+
hypotrichs).
bristles: stiff or almost immobile, usually rather short (<5 pm) and often paired cilia, possibly with sensory
function (thus, previously often termed sensory bristles).
buccal cavity: depression or invaginated, more or less densely ciliated area ofbody leading directly td the -+ cy-
tostome; part of the -+ oral apparatus.
caudal cilium: a cilium (or group of cilia) usually longer than the other somatic cilia arising at the posterior end
of the cell; in -+ hypotrichs modified to -+ (caudal)cirri.
circumoral: around the mouth.
cirrus (p/. cirri): more or less large number of cilia which adhere together; typically found in -+ hypotrichs.
conjugation: sexual reproduction where the partners usually fuse locally, exchange genetic material (nuclei),
and separate; does not increase the number of individuals.
contractile vacuole: liquid-filled --> organelle (sometimes multiple), serving as an osmoregulator in the cyto-
plasm of all freshwater ciliates; generally pulsates with a certain frequency; empties over one or more ex-
crelory pores.
cortex: the outer portion or layer of the ciliate body; comprising, inter alia, the -+ pellicle, the --l basal bodies,
and the -+ fibres associated with the basal bodies.
cortical (subpellicular) granules: about 0.5-2 trrm sized granules in the outer cell layer (-+ cortex). Colour,
shape, size, and arrangement of the granules are important species characteristics, which are, however,
usually recognizable only in live specimens. Some granules are likely special -) extrusomes.
crystals: usually small, highly refractile, edged or globular ("lithosomes") stmctures, composed of an inorganic
(phosphorus, calcium, magnesium, sulfur, chlorine) and organic component and enclosed in -+ vacuoles.
Some are ion regulators, others are presumable end products of the metabolism.
cyrtos: -+ oral basket.
cyst: nonmotile, usually globular stage in the life cycle of many ciliates; several types have been described, for
example, resting cysts, digestive cysts, division cysts.
cytopharynx: -+ pharynx.
cytopyge (cytoproct): cell anus; usually in posterior body half or in the -+ vestibulum (for example, in -+ perit-
richs).
cytostome: cell mouth; permanent or pre-formed opening which denotes the end of any ciliation and through
which (via the following -+ pharynx) food materials pass into the cytoplasm. Usually, the cytostome is
surrounded by specialized ciliature (-+ adoral organelles, -+ undulating membrane, -+ circumoral ciliary
73r

Glossary
row) and located at the cell surface (for example, in -+ gymnostomatids) or in a deep -+ (buccal) cavity,
the -+ vestibulum (e.g. -+ peritrichs, -+ Bursaridium).
division: --> morphogenesis; in contrast to -+ conjugation, the number of individuals is increased.
dorsal brush: field of usually stiff and short cilia (-+ bristles) at the dorsal side of the anterior body portion of
-+ gymnostomatids and cyrtophorids (+ Phascolodon).
endoral membrane: one of the two -+ undulating membranes of the -+ hypotrichs; extends on bottom of -+
buccal cavity.
encystment: formation of a -+ cyst.
extrusome: a structure, usually arranged near cell surface, which is extruded under conditions of appropriate
chemical or mechanical stimulation; used for prey capture and defence. According to size, shape and func-
tion many types are distinguished, for example, -+ mucocysts, -+ trichocysts, -+ toxicysts, haptocysts, -+
cortical granules.
excystment: leaving of the -+ cyst.
fibres: thread-like structures (filaments and microtubules), mainly in the -» cortex (-+ also myoneme).
food vacuole: intracellular vesicle (vacuole) containing food within which the latter is digested; usually formed
at inner end of -+ pharynx.
granules: -+ cortical granules.
infraciliature: ciliary pattern; assembly of all -+ basal bodies and associated -+ fibres.
kinetome: + infraciliature.
kinetosome: -+ basal body.
kinety: ciliary row.
macronucleus: vegetative or trophic nucleus of ciliates; controls the organisms phenotype. Usually pqlyploid,
except for the Karyorelictea (e.9., Loxodes) where it is diploid. Shape and number (one to many hundred)
of macronuclear nodules are important taxonomic features. Originates from -+ micronucleus during sexual
reproduction (-+ conjugation).
membrane: generalized term with a variety of particular meanings depending on its specific modifier (for ex-
ample, cell membrane, -+ endoral membrane, -+ undulating membrane).
membranelles: compound structure composed of many adhering cilia in left portion of -+ oral apparatus; many se-
rially arranged membranelles form the -+ adoral zong of membranelles of -+ heterotrichs and -+ hypotrichs.
micronucleus: generative (and usually smaller) nucleus of ciliates; is concerned with sexual processes. Invaria-
bly diploid and usually spherical or ellipsoidal. The -+ macronucleus takes its rise from a part of the mi-
(+
cronucleus genome during sexual reproduction conjugation).
morphogenesis: division sensu lato; comprises the formation of the new oral apparatus (-) stomatogenesis), nu-
cleus division and division of the cell (cytokinesis); in contrast to -+ conjugation, the number of individu-
als is increased.
mouth: -+ cytostome; sometimes (incorrectly) used instead of -+ oral apparatus.
mucocysts: slimy -+ extrusomes as defence against poison and probably involved in -+ cyst formation.
myoneme: contractile, fibrillar structure; well recognizable in the stalk (as "stalk muscle") of -+ peritrichs (for
example -+ Vorticella).
nematodesma (p/. nematodesmata): -> oral basket.
nuclear apparatus: -+ macronucleus plus -) micronucleus.
nucleolus (p/. nucleoli): dense site(s) in the -+ macronucleus, where rRNA is synthesized and ribonucleopro-
teins, the precursers of ribosomes, are formed.
ontogenesis: * -+ morphogenesis.
oral apparatus: all structures and -+ organelles involved in or quite directly related with feeding, for example,
-+ adoral organelles, -+ cytostome, -+ pharynx, -+ undulating membrane.
oral basket (cyrtos, rhados): usually distinct, funnel-shaped structure composed of microtubular bundles (oral.
basket rods, nematodesmata) and strengthening the -+ pharynx. Depending on the origin of the microtu-
bules, a cyrtos (e.g. cyrtophorids l-+ Phascolodonl) and rhabdos (e.g. -+ gymnostomatids) type of oral
basket are distinguished.
732

Glossary
oral basket rods: -+ oral basket.
oral primordium: -+ anlage.
organelle: "organ" of an unicellular organism, for example, -+ the contractile vacuole; analogous to the organs
(for example, kidney) of the metazoans. Organelles are compartments of one cell, organs are composed of
many cells.
paroral membrane: -+ undulating membrane.
pellicle: "skin" of the ciliates, sensu lato identical with -+ cortex, sensu stricto with cell membrane and pellicu-
lar -+ alveoli.
peristome: * -+ oral apparatus.
pharynx: throat; nonciliated tubular passeway leading from the J cytostome proper into the inner cytoplasm;
typically, -+ food vacuoles are formed at its inner end; often strengthened by oral basket rods (nematodes-
mata, -+ oral basket) made of microtubules.
postoral: behind (underneath) of -+ oral apparatus.
preoral: in front (above) of -+ oral apparatus.
protargol: silver-protein-compound (-+ silver impregnation).
reorganization band: special section in the + macronucleus of some ciliates (-+ hypotrichs, -+ oligotrichs),
involved in DNA replication and histone synthesis.
replication band: --> reorganization band.
rhabdos: -+ oral basket.
scopula: stalk forming and attachment -+ organelle at posterior pole of -+ peritrichs. The analogous structure of
stalked -+ suctorians is named scopuloid.
scutica: usually a small group of barren -+ basal bodies underneath the -+ oral apparatus; during -+ stomato-
genesis, a part of the new -+ mouth is formed by this structure, which occurs only in the scuticociliates
(for example, -+ H istiobalantium), a group of the -+ hymenostomes.
silver impregnation: cytological methods where silver ions (e.g. -+ protargol, silver nitrate) deposit onto argy-
rophilic sites (especially the -+ basal bodies) and which are then visible in the light microscope. For a de-
tailed description of these methods, see chapter 2.2.
silverline system: striated or reticulate cortical structure, which can be stained (impregnated) with silver nitrate
(-+ silver impregnation); usually composed of -+ fibres, and possibly involved in --> morphogenetic proc-
esses and/or conduction of stimuli.
somatic: belonging to the body; as opposed to oral.
stomatogenesis: formation of the new -+ oral apparatus during cell division (-+ morphogenesis).
suture: the linear space left between the ends of converging ciliary rows (for example, in front of and behind the
-+ oral apparatus of -+ Frontonia).
swarmer: freely motile disperse stage in the life cycle of a number of sessile ciliates, for example, of --> perit-
richs and --> suctorians.
symbiotic algae: single-celled algae living symbiotic in the ciliate cytoplasm (-+ zoochlorellae).
toxicysts: -+ extrusomes filled with poison and used for capture of prey.
trichocysts: needle-shaped -+ extrusomes used for defence.
type species: species on which a genus is based; the sole species which cannot be removed from the genus.
undulating membrane (paroral membrane): one or several rows of narrowly spaced cilia, which usually ad-
here together at the right margin of the + oral apparatus; see also -+ endoral membrane.
vacuole: vesicle; -+ contractile vacuole and -+ food vacuole.
vestibulum: -+ buccal cavity.
zoochlorellae: -+ symbiotic algae of fhe genus Chlorella.
zooids: the individuals of + peritrichs with branched stalk.
133



6
LITERATI.IRE,
With few exceptions, titles of journals are given in accordance with the abbreviations found in the 4th edition of the ,,World List of Scientific
Periodicals", published by Butterworth, London, in 1963-1965. Also practically without exception, all works cited here have been exam-
ined firsrhand in order that dates, titles, names of journals and books, and complete pagination could be given with accuracy. EHREN-
BERG's works are dated according to CORLISS (1979).
ADDICOTT, J.F. (1974): Predation and prey community s[ucture: an experimental study of the effect of mosquito larvae on the protozoan
communities of pitcher plants. - Ecology, 55: 475492.
AELTERMAN, H. (1952): Onderzoek over de begroeiing van voorwerpen in stromend water. - Biol. Jaarb., 19: 199250.
AGAMALIEV, F.G. ( 1980): Infusoria of brakish-water and saline lakes of the Apsüeron Peninsula. - Zool. Zh., 59: 335-341 (in Russian
with English summary).
AGAMALIEV, F.G. (1986): Ciliates of the low-salinity lagoons of the Caspian Sea. -Arch. Protistenk., l3l:201-214.
AGAMALIYEV, F.G. (1976): Infusorians off the westem shore of the Central Caspian. Oceanology, 15:208211.
AGAMALIYEV, F.G. & ALIYEV, A.R. (1983): Benthic infusoria from the Divichinskiy estuary of the Caspian Sea. - Hydrobiol. J., 18 (ye-
ars 198211983):20-24.
AGATHA, S. (1995): Taxonomie und Ökologie ausgewählter planktischer und tychopelagischer Ciliaten (Protozoa, Ciliophora) des
Speicherkoogs Dithmarschen und des Beltringharder Koogs. Dissertation Universität Hamburg 211 pp & Anhang.
AGATHA, S. & RIEDEL-LORJ6, J.C. (1997): Morphology, infraciliature, and ecology of halteriids and strombidiids (Ciliophora, Oligotri-
chea) from coastal brackish water basins. - Arch. Protistenk., 148: 445459.
ALADRO LUBEL, M.A. (1985): Algunos ciliados intersticiales de Isla de Enmedio, Veracruz, M6xico. - An. Inst. Biol. Univ. M6x., Ser.
Zoologia (l),55 (year 1984): 1-59.
ALBRECHT, J. (1984): Zur Autökologie ausgewählter Aufwuchsciliaten des Weser-Flußsystems (Protozoa: Ciliophora). - Decheniana,
137: 132-167.
ALBRECHT, J. (1986): Periphyton (Aufwuchs) communities of ciliated protozoa in salt-polluted running waters of the Weser River Basin -
Their structure and indicator value (including model ecosystems). - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 7l: 181-224.
ALEKPEROV, I.K. (1980): The relationship of some planktonic infusoria in Azerbaidjani reservoirs to temperature & oxygen regime of the
water. -lzv. Akad. Nauk azerb. SSR (Biologicueskie), year 1980: 83-87 (in Russian).
ALEKPEROV, I.H. (1981): Food relationships of freshwater ciliates with other hydrobionts. - Int. Congr. Protozool., 6: 9 (Abstract).
ALEKPEROV, I.K. (1982): Planktonic infusoria as indicators of the extent of organic pollution in Azerbaidzhanian reservoirs. - Hydrobiol.
J., 17 (years 198111982):4349.
ALEKPEROV, I.K. (1983): Infusoria of the very deep Terterchay Reservoir. - Hydrobiol. J., 18 (years 198211983):20-25.
ALEKPEROV, I.K. (1983a): Ciliates of pelogen in rearing ponds of the Kura experimental sturgeon hatchery. - Zool.2h.,62: 331-338 (in
Russian with English summary).
ALEKPEROV, I.K. ( 1984a): Free-living infusoria of Khachinchay Reservoir. - Hydrobiol. 1.,20: 17-22.
ALEKPEROV, I.K. (1984b): New species of freshwater ciliates (Heterotrichida) from artificial water bodies of Azerbaijan. - Zool.2h.,63:
173l-1734 (in Russian with English summary).
ALEKPEROV, I.K. (1984c): New species of free-living ciliates (Hypostomata) in the inland water bodies of Azerbaijan. -Zool.Zh.,63:
1250-1253 (in Russian with English summary).
ALEKPEROV, I.K. (1984d): New species of ciliates (Gymnostomata) from water bodies of Azerbaijan.-Zool.Zh.,63: 1417-1420 (in Rus-
sian with English summary).
ALEKPEROV, LK. ( 1984e): New genus and species of Ciliophora from water bodies of Azerbaijan. - Zool. 2h.,63: l89l-1893 (in Russian
with English summary).
ALEKPEROV, LK. (1985): New freeJiving ciliates from fresh waters of Azerbaijan. - Zool. Zh., 64: 1461-1467 (in Russian with English
summary).
ALEKPEROV, I.K. (1988): Relationships of trophic groups of freshwater infusoria of Azerbaidjan in different biotops and their biocenotic
relations with other hydrobionts. - Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR, year 1988:57-62 (in Russian).
ALEKPEROV, I.K. (1989): Type and rate of sterile substrates colonization by limnetic infusoria. - ZooL Zh.68: 15*20 (in Russian with
English summary).
ALEKPEROV, K. (1990): Daily vertical migrations of fresh-water ciliates in the reservoirs of Azerbaijan. - Protozoology, 13: 70-82 (in
Russian with English summary).
ALEKPEROV, I.K. & KRYUCHKOV, V.I. (1982): Planktonic infusoria of the Kura hatchery ponds. - Hydrobiol. J., 17 (years 1981/1982):
18-21.
ALEKPEROV, I.H. & MAMAJEVA, N.V. (1992): Planktonic infusoria from the Chuckchee and the Bering Seas. Zool. Zh.,7l: 5-14 (in
Russian with English summary).
ALEYA, L. & HARTMANN, H.J. (1995): Relative contribution of bacteria, algae and ciliates to the microplankton biomass in an eutrophic
lake. - Lakes & Reservoirs: Research and Management, 1: I 07-l I 3.
ALIEV, A.R. (1982): On the fauna of infusoria microbenthos of Lakes Adzikabul and Nakhalykhchal. - lzv. Akad. Nauk azerb. SSR (Biolo-
gicueskie), year 1982:83-88 (in Russian).
ALIEV, A.R. (1988): Free-living infusoria of Lake Dzhandar.-Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR, year 1988: 54-61 (in Russian).
ALLEN, W.E. (1920): A quantitative and statistical study ofthe plankton ofthe San Joaquin River and its tributaries in and near Stockton,
Califomia, in 1913. - Univ. Calif. Publs Zool., 22: l-292.
135

Literature
AL-RASHEID, K.A.S. (1996)): Records of free-living ciliates in Saudi Arabia. II. Freshwater benthic ciliates of Al-Hassa Oasis, Eastem Re-
gion. - Arab. GulfJ. Scient. Res., 15: 187-205.
ALONS, P., GIL, I. & RODRIGUEZ, D. (1981): Estudio de los protozoos de varias depuradoras de aguas residuales municipales. - Bol. R.
Soc. Espafiola Hist. Nat. (Biol.), 79:67--78.
ALONSO, P., GIL, I. & RODRiGUEZ, D. (1981): Estudio de los protozoos de varias depuradoras de aguas residuales municipales. - Boln
R. Soc. esp. Hist. nat., 79:67--78.
AMBARTZUMYAN, M.A. (1962): On free-living infusoria in the water reservoirs of Erevan. - Izv. Akad. Nauk armyan. SSR, 15: 87-91
(in Russian with Armenian summary).
AMBERG, O. (1903): Biologische Notiz über den Lago dill4tzzaro. - ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 10: 74-85.
AMBLARD, C., SIME-NGANDO, T., RACHIQ, S. & BOURDIER, G. (1993): Importance of ciliated protozoa in relation to the bacterial
and phytoplanktonic biomass in an oligo-mesotrophic lake, during the spring diatom bloom. - Aquatic Sciences, 55: l-9.
AMBLARD, C., BOURDIER, G., SIME-NGANDO, T., RACHIQ, S. & CARRIAS, J.-F. (1994): Studies on Lake Nantua. Diel and vertical
variations of the microbial stocks (bacteria, heterotrophic flagellates, ciliates, phytoplankton) and their relative activities. - Arch. Hydro-
biol. Beih. Ergebn. Limnol.,4l: 125-144.
AMBLARD, C., CARRIAS, J.-F., BOURDIER, G. & MAURIN, N. (1995): The microbial loop in a humic lake: seasonal and vertical varia-
tions in the structure ofthe different communities. - Hydrobiologia, 300/301: 7l-84.
ANDR6,, E. ltOtZ]): Infusoire. - Catalogue des invert6br6s de la Suisse, 6: I-XIX & 1-227.
ANDRE, E. (1914): Recherches sur la faune p6lagique du L6man et description de nouveaux genres d'infusoires. - Revue suisse Zool., 22:
179-193.
ANDRE, E. (1915): Contribution ä l'6tude de la faune infusorienne du Lac Majeur et description de formes nouvelles. - Revue suisse Zool.,
23: l0l-108.
ANDR6, E. (1916): Contribution ä l'6tude de la faune infusorienne du L6man. - Revue suisse Zool., 24:621-634.
ANDRE, E . (1926): Sur le plancton du Rh6ne. - Schweiz. Z. Hydrol.,3: 259-266.
ANTONIETTI, R, BROGLIO, P. & MADONI, P. (1982): Valutazione di parametri biologici come indici di efficienza di depurazione in im-
pianti a fanghi attivi. - Ingegneria Ambientale, ll:.472477.
APSTEIN, C. (1893): Vergleich der Planktonproduction in verschiedenen holsteinischen Seen. - Ber. naturf. Ges. Freiburg i. B., 7: 70-88.
ARCHBOLD, J.H.G. & BERGER, J. (1985): A qualitative assessment of some metazoan predators of Halteria grandinella, a common
freshwater ciliate. - Hydrobiolog ia, 126: 97 - 1 02.
ARNDT, H. (1991): On the importance ofplanktonic protozoans in the eutrophication process ofthe Baltic Sea. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol.
Hydrogr.. 76:387-396.
ARNDT, H. (1994): Protozoen als wesentliche Komponente pelagischer Ökosysteme von Seen. - Kataloge des O. Ö. Landesmuseums Linz,
Neue Folge. 7l: I I l- 147.
ARNDT, H. (editor) (1994a): Protozooplankton ecology - Methods and seasonal successions. - Marine Microbial Food Webs, 8: l-384.
ARNDT, H., KROCKER, M., NIXDORF, B. & KÖHLER, A. (1993): Long-term annual and seasonal changes of meta- and protozooplank-
ton in Lake Müggelsee (Berlin): effects of eutrophication, grazing activities, and the impact of predation. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol.
Hydrogr., 78:319402.
ARSLANOVA, T.P. (1980): Infusoria and their development in the plankton of certain lakes. - Inf. Byul. Biol. vnutr. Vod., 45:22-23 (in
Russian).
ARTHUR, J.R. & LOM, J. (1984): Trichodinid protozoa (Ciliophora: Peritrichida) from freshwater fishes of Rybinsk Reservoir, USSR. - J.
Protozool., 3l: 82-91,
AUGUSTIN, H. & FOISSNER, W. (1992): Morphologie und Ökologie einiger Ciliaten (Protozoa: Ciliophora) aus dem Belebtschlamm. -
Arch. Protistenk ., 14l 243-283.
AUGUSTIN, H., FOISSNER, W. & ADAM, H. (1984): An improved pyridinated silver carbonate method which needs few specimens and
yields permanent slides of impregnated ciliates (Protozoa, Ciliophora). - Mikroskopie, 4l: 134-137.
AUSTIN, K.H., HARTEL, P.G. & COLEMAN, D.C. (1990): Effect of genetically-altered Pseudomonas solanacearum on predatory proto-
zoa. - Soil. Biol. Biochem., 22: 115-111.
AVERINTZEV, S. (1899): K faunistikye Protozoa bologhova i egho okrestnostei. - Protok. Soobshch. Zas6d. S-Peterb. med. Obshch., 30:
238-251,262-264 (in Russian with German summary).
AWERINZEW, S. (1908): Beiträge zur Kenntnis der Süsswasserprotozoen. - Annls Biol. lacustre, 2 (1907*1908): 163-170.
AX, P. & AX, R. (1960): Experimentelle Untersuchungen über die Salzgehaltstoleranz von Ciliaten aus dem Brackwasser und Süßwasser. -
Biol. Zbl.,79:7-31.
AZAM, F., FENCHEL, T., FIELD, J.G., GRAY, J.S., MEYER-REIL, L.A. & THINGSTAD, F. (1983): The ecological role of water-column
microbes in the sea. - Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., I0:257-263.
BADER, F.G., TSUCHIYA, H.M. & FREDRICKSON, A.G. (1976): Grazing of ciliates on blue-green algae: effects of ciliate encystment
and related phenomena. - Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 18: 3 1 l-332.
BAILEY, J.W. (1851): Microscopical observations made in South Carolina, Georgia and Florida. - Smithson. Contr. Knowl., 2: 148.
BALBIANI, E.-G. (1893): Observations sur le Didinium nasutum (STEIN) (Vorticella nasuta, O.-F. MÜLLER). - Archs zool. exp. gdn.,2:
363-394.
BALDENSPERGER, A. (1927a): La faune et la flore planctoniques des 6tangs du Haut-Rhin et des r6gions Voisines. III. Notes hydrobiolo-
giques d'aprös les pöches faites en 1927 et 1928. - Bul[. Soc. Hist. nat. Colmar, 20 (yeN 1926):169-296.
BALDENSPERGER, A. (1927b): La faune et la flore planctoniques des lacs des Hautes-Vosges et des 6tangs du HaurRhin. II Notes hydro-
biologiques. - Bull. Soc. Hist. nat. Colmar (N. S.), 20: l- 89.
BALLARD, A.C. (1952): Some observations on Mesodinium acarus STEIN (fresh water). - J. Quekett microsc. Club, 3: 327-333.
BAMFORTH, S.S. (1963): Limnetic protozoa of southeastern Louisiana. - Proc. La Acad. Sci., 26: 120-134.
136

Literature
BAMFORTH,S.S.(1967):Amicrobial comparisonoftwoforestsoilsofsoutheasternLouisiana. Proc.LaAcad.Sci.,30:7 16.
BAMFORTH, S.S. ( 1969): Protozoa and algae of the Mississippi deltaic soils. - Proc. La Acad. Sci., 32: 6U-77.
BAMFORTH, S.S., CURDS, C.R. & FINLAY, B.J. ( 1987): Protozoa of two Kenya Lakes. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 106: 3-54-358.
BARBIER, M., FAUR6,-FREMIET, E. & LEDERER, E. ( 1956): Sur les pigments du cili6, Stantor nigcr. C. r. hebd. S6anc. Acad. Sci.. Pa-
ris.242:2182-2184.
BARBIERI, S.M. & GODINHO ORLANDI, M.J.L. (1989a): Ecological studies on the planktonic protozo of a eutrophic reservoir (Rio
Grande Reservoir - Brazil). - Hydrobiologia, 183: l-10.
BARBIERI, S.M. & GODINHO-ORLANDI, M.J.L. (1989b): Plar.rktonic protozoa in a tropical reservoir: Iernporal variations in abundance
and composition. - Revta Hydrobiol. trop.,22:275-285.
BARDELE,C.F.(1992):Supposedevolutionarytrendsinprostomeciliates.-J.Protozool.Suppl.,39: l34.
BARDELE, C.F. ( 1999): Ultrastructure, morphogenesis, and a discussion of the phylogeny of the prostome clliate Balation plattttotticunt. -
Europ. J. Protistol.,35: l7-33.
BARK, A.W. (1981): The temporal and spatial distribution of planktonic and benthic protozoan communities in a small productive lake. -
Hydrobiologia. 85: 239-25 5.
BARK, A.W. (1985): Studies or.r ciliated protozoa in eutrophic lakes: l. Seasonal distribution in relation to thermal stratificiltion and hypo-
limnetic anoxia. - Hydrobiologia, 124: 167-176.
BARK, A.W. & GOODFELLOW, J.G. (1985): Snrdies on ciliated protozoa in eutrophic lakes: 2. Field and laboratory studies on the effects
of oxygen and other chemical gradients on ciliate distribution. - Hydrobiologia, 124: 177-188.
BARK, A.W. & WATTS, J.M. ( 1984): A comparison of the growth characteristics and spatial distribution of hypolimnetic ciliates in a small
lake ar.rd an artificial lake ecosystem. - J. gen. Microbiol., 130: 3 I l3-3 122.
BARTSCH, I. & HARTWIG, E. (1984): Die bodenlebende Mikrofauna im Hamburger Haf'en. - Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl.,6l: 543--586.
BARY, B.M. ( 1950): Studies on the freshwater ciliates of New Zealand Part II An annotated list of species from the neighbourhood of Wel-
lington. - Trans. R. Soc. N. 2., 78: 3ll-323.
BATTISH, S.K. (1992): Freshwater zooplankton of India. Oxford & IBH Publishing Co, New Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta. 233 pp.
BAUER, J. (1987): Ökologische Untersuchungen an Aufwuchsciliaten zweier abwasserbelasteter Gebirgsbäche (Mettma und GutachAVut-
ach, Südschwarzwald). - Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl.. 77: l-31.
BEARDSLEY, A.E. (1902): Notes on Colorado protozoa. With descriptions of new species. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 23: 49-59.
BEAUCHAMP, P.DE (1918): Notes faunistiques: quelques formes rares ou int6ressantes de la r6gion Parisienne. Bull. Soc. zool. Fr.,43:
78 83.
BEAUCHAMP, P.DE & COLLIN, B. (1910): Quelques documents sw Hastatalla larlian^s ERLANGER. Archs Zool. exp. g6n. (Notes et
Revue),5: 28-33.
BEAVER, J.R. & CRISMAN, T.L. (1982): The trophic response of ciliated protozoans in freshwater lakes. - Limnol. Ocear.rogr., 27:
246 2s3.
BEAVER, J.R. & CRISMAN, T.L. (1989a): Analysis of the community structure of planktonic ciliated protozoa relative to trophic state in
Florida Iakes. - Hydrobiologia, 174: 111-184.
BEAVER, J.R. & CRISMAN, T.L. (1989b): The role of ciliated protozoa in pelagic freshwater ecosystems. - Microb. Ecol., 17: I I l-136.
BEAVER, J.R. & CRISMAN, T.L. (1990): Use of microzooplankton as an early indicator of advancing cultural eutrophication. - Verh. int.
Verein. theor. angew. Limnol., 24:532-531.
BEAVER. J.R., CRISMAN, T.L. & BIENERT, R.W.Jr. (1988): Distribution of planktonic ciliates in highly coloured subtropical lakes: com-
parison with clearwater ciliate communities and the contribution of myxotrophic taxa to total autotrophic biomass. - Freshwat. Biol., 20:
5 l-60.
BECK,G.(1942):BeitragzurBiologievonOpltrydiuntyersatile. Mikrokosmos,35:95-98.
BEERS, C.D. (1926): The lif-e-cycle in the ciliate Didinium nasiltilnt with reference to encystment. -J. Morph., 42: l-21.
BEERS, C.D. (1927): The relation between hydrogen-ion concentration and encyshnent in Dicliniunt nosutunt. - J. Morph. Physiol., 44:
2t 28.
BEERS, C.D. (1928a): The relation of dietary insufficiency to vitality in the ciliate Diclittiunt nosutum. -J. exp. Zool.,5l:. l2l-133.
BEERS, C.D. (1928b): Rhythms in infusoria, with special reference lo Didinium ndslttunt. J. exp.Zool.,5l:485493.
BEERS, C.D. (1928c): Some efl'ects of dietary insufficiency in the ciliate Didinitm nasutunt. - Proc. natn. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 14: 132-131.
BEERS, C.D. (1935): Structural changes during encystment and excystment in the ciliate Didini\nl ndsutunl. - Arch. Protistenk., 34:
133 155.
BEERS, C.D. ( I 937): The viability of ten-year-old Didiniunt cysts (lnf usoria). - Am. Nat., 7l: 521-525.
BEERS, C. D. ( 1945): The excystment process in the ctliate Didiniunt nosutunt. - J. Elisha Mitchell scient. Soc., 6l: 264 215.
BELIKHOFF, D.V. (1936): Le potamoplankton du Volga. Uchen. Zap. kazan. gos. Univ. (Zoologia),96: 3-140 (in Russian with French
sumrnary).
BELOVA, S.L. (1988): The species structure of periphytic infusoria associations in the Mozhaisk Reservoir. - Nauch. Dokl. vyssh. Shk.,
Biologicheskie Nauki, year 1988: 65-67 (in Russian with En_elish summary).
BELOVA, S.L. (1989): Seasonal changes in the composition of the Mozhaisk reservoir infusoria. - Gidrobiol. 2h.,25:29-32 (in Russian
with English summary).
BELOVA, S.L. (1990): AHA,'1143 CXOACTBA TAKCOHOMI4TIECKO|O COCTABA I4HOy3OPI,I|4 MOXAIZCKO|O, BA3y3CKO|O
A ,y3CKOfO BOAOXPAHI4II4I!. - Gidrobiol.2h.,26: 20 23 (in Russian with English summary).
BELOVA, S.L. (1994): The occurrence ofciliated protozoa in the pelagic zone ofreservoirs. - Arch. Hydrobiol. Beih. Ergebn. Limnol.,40:
t43-t48.
BENDL, W.E. ( l9l7): Gallertkugeln im Wörthersee. - Carinthia ll, 1061107: l-1.
731

Literature
BERECZKY, M.Cs. (1969): Untersuchungen über die Protozoenfauna der Donau bei Als6göd (Ungarn) (Danubialia Hungarica, LII). -
Opusc. zoo[., Bpest,9: 87-96.
BERECZKY, M.Cs. (1972): A szentendrei 6s väci Duna-äg csill6s egysejtüinek vizsgälata. - Hidrol. Kö21., year 1972:214-211 (in Hungari-
an).
BERECZKY, M.Cs. (1975): Die ökologische Charakterisierung einiger Ciliatenorganismen des ungarischen Donauabschnittes. Annls
Univ. Scient. bpest. Rolando Eötvös, Sectio biologica, 17: 123-136.
BERECZKY, M. Cs. (1975a): Az äraml{si sebessdg 6s a viz{lläs v1ltozäsänak hatäsa a duna planktoni ciliata-populäci6jänak alakuläsära
(Danubialia Hungarica, LXXVI) (Einfluss der Stromgeschwindigkeit und der Anderungen des Wasserstandes auf die Gestaltung der
planktonischen Ciliatenpopulation der Donau). - Allatt. Kö21., 62: l5 2 I (in Hungarian with German summary).
BERECZKY, M.Cs. (1977): Kurzfristige Untersuchungen über die Auswirkung des abnehmenden Donauwasserstandes auf die planktische
Ciliatenpopulation und die Gestaltung ihrer saprobiologischen Verhältnisse (Danubialia Hungarica LXXXII). - Annls Univ. Scient.
bpest. Rolando Eötvös, Sectio biologica, 18-19 (years 19'7611977):179-188.
BERECZKY, M.Cs. (1977a): Kennzeichnung der saprobiologischen Verhältnisse des oberen ungarischen Donauabschnittes mit Hilfe von
Protozoen als Indikatoren (Danubialia Hungarica, XLIV). - Opusc. zool., Bpest, 14:55-66.
BERECZKY, M.Cs. (1977b): Die ökologische Charakterisierung einiger Ciliatenorganismen des ungarischen Donauabschnittes (Danubialia
Hungarica LXXXI. Teil 2). - Annls Univ. Scient. bpest. Rolando Eötvös, Sectio biologica, 18-19 (years 197611977): 157-177.
BERECZKY, M.Cs. (1979a): Faunistische, ökologische, saprobiologische Untersuchungen an den Ciliaten aus dem ungarischen Donauab-
schnitt (1966-1976). - Societas Internationalis Limnologiae. Intemationale Arbeitsgemeinschaft Donauforschung (Bulgarien, Sofia), 19.
Jubiläumstagung: 23 5-238.
BERECZKY, M.Cs. (1979b): Gestaltung der Ciliata- und Testacea-Populationen der Donau unter der Einwirkung des Flussregimes und der
Wasserkunstbauten zwischen Väc und Göd (Danubialia Hungarica LXXXX). - Annls Univ. Scient. bpest. Rolando Eötvös, Sectio bio-
logica,20-21 (years 197811979): 205-227 .
BERECZKY, M.Cs. (1985): Fixations- und Färbungsschnellverfahren bei quantitativen ökologischen Untersuchungen von Protozoen in Bin-
nengewässem. - Arch. Protistenk., 129: 187-190.
BERECZKY, M.Cs. (1991): Changes in the structure and nutrition preference of the protozoa community in standing water developed from
running water. - Acta Protozool.,30: 25-31.
BERECZKY, M.Cs. (1995): The protozoan plankton and their saprobity relations in the Maros (Mure;) River. In HAMAR, J. &
SÄRKÄNY-KISS, A. (eds.): The Maros/l\4ureq River Valley, pp. 165-174. Tisza Klub, Szolnok.
,
BERECZKY, M.Cs. (1998): Long-term ecological investigations of protozoan communities in the Danube River. - Verh. int. Verein. theor.
angew. Limnol., 26: 97 8-982.
BERECZKY, M.Cs. & NOSEK, J.N. ( 1993): The influence of ecological fäctors on rffi«dance of different ciliated protozoa populations
in the Danube river. L lnvestigation of the ecological amplitude. - Acta Protozool.,32: l-16.
BERECZKY, M.Cs. & NOSEK, J.N. (1994): Composition and feeding spectrum of protozoa in the river Danube, with particular reference to
planktonic ciliata. - Limnologica,24: 23-28.
BERECZKY, M.Cs. & NOSEK, J.N. (1995): Protozoological investigations in the side-arm system Szigetköz of the River Danube
(1991-1992). - Opusc. zool., Bpest, 27-28: 123-135.
BERECZKY, M.Cs., OERTEL, N. & NOSEK, J.N. (1983): Die tiefenabhängige Entwicklung des Protozoenaufwuchses auf künstlichem
Substrat in der Donau I. Die Frage der Tiefenschichtung (Danubialia Hungarica CII). - Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl., 68: 37-62.
BERG, T.O. & SAND, O. (1994): Spontaneous all-or-nothing action potentials in the ciliate Bursaridium dffit'ile. - J. Euk. Microbiol., 41:
t3-17.
BERGER, H. (1999): Monograph of the Oxytrichidae (Ciliophora, Hypotrichia). - Monographiae biol.,78: l-1079.
BERGER, H. & FOISSNER, W. (1987): Morphology and biometry of, some soil hypotrichs (Protozoa: Ciliophora). -Zoo| lb. Syst., 114:
t93-239.
BERGER, H., FOISSNER, W. & ADAM, H. ( 1983): Morphology and morphogene sis of Fuscheria terrir:ola n. sp. and Spathidium mus('or-
rzn (Ciliophora: Kinetofragminophora). - J. Protozool., 30: 529-535.
BERGER, H., FOISSNER, W. & KOHMANN, F. (1997): Bestimmung und Ökologie der Mikrosaprobien nach DIN 38410. G. Fischer,
Stuttgart, Jena, Lübeck, Ulm. 291 pp.
BERGER, J. (1979): The feeding behavior of Didinium nasutum on an atypical prey ciliate (Colpidium c'ampylum). - Trans. Am. microsc.
Soc.,98: 48'7494.
BERGER, J. ( I 980): Feeding behaviour of Didinium nasutum on Paramecium hursaria with normal or apochlorotic zoochlorellae. - J. gen.
Microbiol.. ll8: 397 404.
BERNATZKY, G., FOISSNER, W. & SCHUBERT, G. (1981): Rasterelektronenmikroskopische und biometrische Untersuchungen über die
Variabilität der Form, Struktur und Größe des Gehäuses einiger limnischer Tintinnina (Protozoa, Ciliophora). - Zool. Scr., 10: 8 l-90.
BERNERTH, H. (1982): Ökologische Untersuchungen im Kühlwassersystem eines konventionellen Großkraftwerks am Untermain unter be-
sonderer Berücksichtigung der Ciliaten (Protozoa). - Cour. Forsch.-Inst. Senckenberg,5T: l-246.
BERNINGER, U.-G., FINLAY, B.J. & CANTER, H.M. (1986): The spatial distribution and ecology of zoochlorellae-bearing ciliates in a
productive pond. - J. Protozool., 33:-55'7-563.
BERNINGER, U.-G., WICKHAM, S.A. & FINLAY, B.J. (1993): Trophic coupling within the microbial food web: a study with fine tempo-
ral resolution in a eutrophic freshwater ecosystem. - Freshwat. Biol., 30: 419432.
BERVOETS, W. (1940): Bijdrage tot de studie der ciliaten van Belgie. - Biol. Jaarb., 7: 111 131.
BEUSCHOLD, E. (1961): Limnologische Untersuchungen am Hauptbecken der Saidenbach-Talsperre. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hy-
drogr..46:1842.
BEVEL, N. ( 1938): Some notes on the protozoa of Reelfoot Lake. - J. Tenn. Acad. Sci., 13: 13'7-159.
BHATIA, B.L. (1924): Some ecological observations on the ciliate protozoa of Lahore. - Proc. Lahore phil. Soc., 3: 1 4.
738

Literature
BHATIA, B.L. ( I936): Protozoa: Ciliophora. In SEWELL, R.B.S. (ed.): The fauna of British India, including Ceylon and Burma. Taylor and
Francis, London. I-XXII & 493 pp.
BHATIA, B.L. & MULLICK, B.K. (1930): On some fiesh-water ciliates fiom Kashmir. - Arch. Protistenk..T2:390403.
BICK, H. ( 1957): Beiträge zur Ökologie einiger Ciliaten des Saprobiensystems. Vom Wass., 24:224-246.
BICK, H. ( 1958): Ökologische Untersuchungen an Ciliaten fallaubreicher Kleingewässer. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 54: 506-542.
BICK, H. (1960): Ökologische Untersuchungen an Ciliaten und anderen Organismen aus verunreinigten Gewässern. - Arch. Hydrobiol.,56:
378-394.
BICK, H. (1966): Ökologische Untersuchungen an Ciliaten des Saprobiensystems. II. Ergebnisse von Sukzessionsstudier.r mit besonderer Be-
rücksichtigung der Autökologie von Colaps hirtus. - Verh. int. Ver"ein. theor. angew. Lirnnol., 16: 845-U53.
BICK, H. (1967): Vergleichende Untersuchung der Ciliatensukzession beim Abbau von Zellstoff in marinem Brackwasser und athalassoge-
nem Brackwasser vom Typ der Kaliwerksabwässer. Hydrobiologia, 29: 185 204.
BICK, H. (l96tt): Autökologische und saprobiologische Untersuchungen an Süsswasserciliaten. - Hydrobiologia,3l: 17- 36.
BICK, H. (1912a): Ciliata. - Binnengewässer,26:31-83.
BICK, H. (19'72b): Ciliated protozoa. An illustrated guide to the species used as biological indicators in freshwater biology. World Health
Organization, Geneva. 198 pp.
BICK, H. & BERTRAM, R. (1973): Experimentell-ökologische Untersuchung der Populationsdynamik von Aufwuchsciliarten unter beson-
derer Berücksichtigung des Temperaturfaktors. - ForschBer. Landes NRhein-Westf'., Nr. 2266: | 29.
BICK, H. & DREWS, E.F. (1973): Selbstreinigung und Ciliatenbesiedlung in saurem Milieu (Modellversuche). Hydrobiologia,42:
393402.
BICK, H. & KUNZE, S. (1971): Eine Zusammenstellung von autökologischen und saprobiologischen Befunden an Süfiwasserciliaten. - lnt.
Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 56:337-384.
BICK, H. & SCHMERENBECK, W. (1971): Vergleichende Untersuchung des Peptonabbaus und der damit verknüpften Ciliatenbesiedlung
in strömenden und stagniererrden Modellgewässern. - Hydrobiologia, 37: 409446.
BICK, H. & SCHOLTYSECK. E. ( 1960t: Ökologische Untersuchungen an Abwasserteichen. Arch. Hydrobiol ..57: 196 216.
BIEGEL, M. ( 1954): Beitrag zur Peritrichenfauna der Umgebung Erlangens. - Arch. Protistenk., 100: 153-lti2.
BIENERT, R.W.Jr., BEAVER, J.R. & CRISMAN, T.L. (1991): The contribution of ciliated protozoa to zooplankton biomass in an acidic.
subtropical lake. J. Protozool.,38:352 354.
BIERNACKA. I. ( 1956): Przyczynek do znajomomo6ci pierwotniak6w Zalewu WiSlanego (Contribution to the knowledge of the Vistula La-
goon protozoans). Polskie Archwm Hydrobiol., 3: 43 68 (in Polish with English summary).
BIGELOW, N.K. ( 1923): The plankton of Lake Nipigon and environs. -Publs Ont. Fish. Res. Lab., No. l-3: 39-66.
BIGELOW, N.K. (1928): The ecological distribution of microscopic organisms in Lake Nipigon. Publs Ont. Fish. Res. Lab., No.35:
58-73.
BLATTERER, H. (1989): Uni-Teich. Weitere Faunistik: Ciliaten (Wirnpertiere). - BUFUS-lnfo, Nr.5: 7-10 (ISSN 0256-4173).
BLATTERER, H. (1994): Die Ciliaten oberösterreichischer Fliessgewässer mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der südlichen Inn-Zubringer. -
Kataloge des O. Ö. Landesmuseums Linz, Neue Folge, 71: 149-163.
BLATTERER, H. & FOISSNER, W. ( 1988): Beitrag zur terricolen Ciliatenfauna (Protozoa: Ciliophora) Australiens. - Stapfia, 17: | 84.
BLOCHMANN, F. (189-5): Die mikroskopische Thierwelt des Süsswassers. Abtheilung I: Protozoa.2nd ed. Lucas Grüf'e & Sillem,
Hamburg. ltt4 pp & Tafeln I Vlll.
BOCK, K.J. (1960): Biologische Untersuchungen, insbesondere der Ciliatenfauna, in der durch Abwässer belasteten Schlei (westliche Ost-
see). Kieler Meeresforsch., 16: 57-68.
BOCK, K.J. & SCHEUBEL, J.B. ( 1979): Die biologische Messung der Wassergüte. - Naturwissenschafien, 66: 505-5 12.
BOIKOVA, E. ( 1984): Ecological character of protozoans (Ciliata, Flagellata) in the Baltic Sea. - Ophelia, Suppl. 3: 23-32.
BORROR. A.C. (1963): Morphology and ecology of the benthic ciliated protozoa of Alli-qator Harbor, Florida. - Alch. Protistenk., 106:
465-534.
BORROR, A.C. (1912): Revision of the order Hypotrichida (Ciliophora, Protozoa). - J. Protozool., 19: I 23.
BORROR, A. (1972a): Tidal marsh ciliates (Protozoa): morphology, ecology, systematics. - Acta Protozool., l0: 29-11.
BORSHEIM, K.Y. (1984): Clearance rates of bacteria-sized particles by freshwater ciliates, measured with monodisperse I'luorescent latex
beads. Oecologia (Berlin), 63: 286-288.
BOURQUIN-LINDT, E. (1919): Contribution ä l'6tude des protozoaires de [a vall6e de La Chaux-de-Fonds. - Bull. Soc. neuchätel. Sci. nat.,
43 (years l9l7-1918): 39-95.
BOUTCHINSKY, P. (1895): Protozoaires trouvds dans les lacs sal6s (limans) de Khadgibei et de Kouialnik.-Zap. novoross. Obshch.
Estest., 20: l3'7 -148 (in Russian).
BOVEE, E.C. ( I957): Protozoa of Amazonian and Andean waters of Colombia, South America. - J. Protozool., 4: 63-66.
BOVEE, E.C. ( 1960): Protozoa of the Mountain Lake Region, Giles County, Virginia. - J. Protozool., 7:352-361.
BOVEE, E.C. (1979): Protozoa fiom acid-bog mosses and fbrest mosses of the Lake Itasca Region (Minnesota, USA). - Kans. Univ. Sci.
Bul1.,5l: 615-629.
BOWNIK-DYLINSKA, L. (l9til): Phosphorus and nitrogen excretion rate by free living planktonic ciliates. - Int. Congr. Protozool.,6: 38,
Abstract.
BRAARUD, T.. FÖYN, B. & CRAN, H.H. (1929): Biologische Untersuchungen in einigen Seen des östlichen Norwegens August-Septem-
ber 1927. - Avh. norske VidenskAkad. Oslo, year 1928: l-37.
BRABRAND, 4., faAf'p,NC, 8.A., KALLQVIST, T. & NILSSEN, J.P. ( 1983): Biological control of undesirable cyanobacreria in cultural-
ly eutrophic lakes. - Oecologia (Berlin), 60: l-5.
BRADBURY, P.C. (1965): The infraciliature and argyrome of Opisrhonetra henneguyi FAURE-FREMIET. J. Protozool., 12:345 363.
BREHM, V. (1907): Die biologische Süßwasserstation zu Lunz-Seehof, Niederösterreich. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 2:465-499.
t39

Literature
BREHM, V. & RUTTNER,F. (1926): Die Biocönosen der Lunzer Gewässer. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 16:281-391.
BRODSKY, A. (1908): Observations sur la structure intime de Frontonia leucas EHRBG. - Revue suisse Zool., 16:75-13O.
BRODSKY, A. (1929): The fauna of the basins of the Desert Kara-Kum. - Acta Univ. Asiae mediae, Series l2.a Geographia,6: l-43 (in
Russian with English summary).
BRUNNTHALER, J., PROWAZEK, S. & WETTSTEIN, R.V. (1901): Vorläufige Mittheilung über das Plankton des Attersees in Oberöster-
reich. - Öst. bot.2., 5l:73-82.
BRUTSCHY, A. (1922): Die Vegetation und das Zooplankton des Hallwiler Sees. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., l0:.27l-298.
BRYANT, V.M.T. & LAYBOURN, J.E.M. (1974): The vertical distribution of Ciliophora and Nematoda in the sediments of Loch Leven,
Kinross. - Proc. R. Soc. Edinb., Section B (Biology), 74:265-273.
BUCHAR, J. (1957): Fauna nälevnikü dolniho riseku potoka botiöe. - Cas. närod. Mus., 126: 137-143 (in Czech with German summary).
BUCK, H. (1961): Zur Verbreitung der Ciliaten in den Fließgewässem Nordwürtternbergs. - Jh. Ver. vaterl. Naturk. Württ., 116: 195-217 .
BUCK, H. (1968): Die Ciliaten des Belebtschlammes in ihrer Abhängigkeit vom Klärverfahren. - Münchn. Beitr. Abwass.- Fisch.-
FIussbiol.. 5: 206-222.
BÜCKER, H. & HAUSMANN, K. (1994): Ophrydiumversatile: Untersuchungen zur Morphologie und Ökologie eines koloniebildenden
Wimpertieres. - Mikrokosmos, 83: 21 l-211.
BUISÄN, E.G. (1944): Contribuci6n al estudio de los protozoos de las aguas dulces. - Publnes Inst. Biol. apl., Barcelona, l:5-24.
BUITKAMP, U. (1979): Vergleichende Untersuchungen zur Temperaturadaptation von Bodenciliaten aus klimatisch verschiedenen Regio-
nen. - Pedobiolo gia, 19 : 221-236.
BUJOR, P. (1902): Contribution ä l'6tude de la faune des lacs sal6s de Roumanie I. Th6kir-Ghiol (D6part. de Constantza-Dobrogea) II. Lacu-
Sarat (Le lac sal6) D6part. de Braila. - Annls scient. Univ. Jassy, I (year l90l): 149-182.
BULLINGTON, W.E. (1925): A study of spiral movement in the ciliate infusoria. - Arch. Protistenk.,50:219-274.
BULLINGTON, W.E. ( 1939): A study of spiraling in the ciliate Frontonia with a review of the genus and a description of two new species.
- Arch. Protistenk.,92: 10-66.
BURBANCK, W.D. & EISEN, J.D. (1960): The inadequacy of monobacterially-fed Paramec'ium aurelia as food for Dldlnium nasutum. - l.
Protozool., 7 : 20 l-206.
BÜRGER, O. (1905): Estudios sobre protozoos chilenos del agua dulce. - An. Univ. Chile, ll7:403449.
BÜRGER, O. (1908): Nuevos estudios sobre protozoos chilenos del agua dulce. - An. Univ. Chile,l22: 131*204.
BÜRGI, H.R., WEBER, P. & BACHMANN, H. (1985): Seasonal variations in the trophic structure of phyto- and zooplankton communities
in lakes in different trophic states. - Schwei z.Z.Hydrol.,47: 197)24.
BURKOVSKY, I.V. (1971): Ciliates of the rocky supralittoral zone in the White Sea. - Zool. 2h.,50: 1569-1572 (in Russian with English
summary).
BURNS, C.W. & GILBERT, J.J. (1993): Predation on ciliates by freshwater calanoid copepods: rates of predation and relative vulnerabili-
ties ofprey. - Freshwat. Biol., 30: 377-393.
BURT, R.L. (1940): Specific analysis of the genus Colpoda with special reference to the standardization of experimental material. - Trans.
Am. microsc. Soc.,59: 414432.
BUTSCHINSKY, P. ( 1 897): Die Protozoen-Fauna der Salzsee-Limane bei Odessa. - Zool. Anz., 20: 194-197 .
BÜTSCHLI, O. (1876): Studien über die ersten Entwicklungsvorgänge der Eizeile, die Zelltheilung und die Conjugation der Infusorien. -
Abh. senckenb. naturforsch. Ges., 10: 213457.
BÜTSCHLI, O. (1887-1889): Protozoa. Abt. III. Infusoria und System der Radiolaria. In BRONN, H.G. (ed.): Klassen und Ordnungen des
Thier-Reichs Vol. I, pp. 1098-2035. C.F. Winter, Leipzig.
BUTZEL, H.M.Jr. & BOLTEN, A.B. (1968): The relationship of the nutritive state of the prey organism Paramecium aureliato the growth
and encystment of Didinium nasutum. - J. Protozool., 15:256-258.
BUTZEL, H.M.Jr. & HORWITZ, H. (1965): Excystment of Didinium nasutum. - J. Protozool., 12:413416.
CAIRNS, J.Jr. (1964): The chemical environment of common fresh-water protozoa. - Notul. Nat., no. 365: l-6.
CAIRNS, J.Jr. (1965): The protozoa of the Conestoga Basin. - Notul. Nat., no. 375: l-14.
CAIRNS, J.Jr. (1966): The Catherwood Foundation Peruvian-Amazon Expedition III - Protozoa. - Monogr. Acad. nat. Sci. Philad., 14:
53-61.
CAIRNS, J.Jr. & DICKSON, K.L. (1972): Water chemistry. - Bulletin. Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. Water Resources
Research Center (Blacksbwg), 54:- 69J 5.
CAIRNS, J.Jr. & RUTHVEN, J.A. (1972): A test of the cosmopolitan distribution of fresh-water protozoans. - Hydrobiologia,39: 4O5421.
CAIRNS, J.Jr. & YONGUE, W.H.Jr. (1966): A checklist of the fresh-water protozoa of the Douglas Lake Region, Michigan. - Notul. Nat.,
no.383: l-10.
CAIRNS, J.Jr. & YONGUE, W.H.Jr. (1973): A comparison of the protozoan communities in a coastal plain river through space and time. -
Revta Biol., Lisb.,9: l5-34.
CAIRNS, J.Jr., YONGUE, W.H.Jr. & BOATIN, H.Jr. (1973): The protozoan colonization of polyurethane foam units anchored in the
benthic area of Douglas Lake, Michigan. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 92: 648456.
CALKINS, G.N. (1901): Some protozoa of especial interest from Van Cortlandt Park, New York. - Am. Nat.,35: 645-658.
CALKINS, G.N. (1902): Marine protozoa from Woods Hole. - Bull. U. S. Fish Commn, 2I (year l90l): 415-468.
CALKINS, G.N. (1915): Didinium nasutum I. The life history. *J. exp.Zool.,19:225-240.
CALKINS, G.N. (1926): The biology of the Protozoa. Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia, New York. 623 pp.
CANELLA, M.F. (1951): Osservazioni morfologiche, biologiche e sistematiche sr Paradileptus estensis sp. n. e su altri Tracheliidae (Holo-
tricha). - Annali Univ. Fenara, Nuova serie, Sezione 3. Biologia animale, 1: 81-170.
CANELLA, M.F. (1954): Ricerche sulla microfauna delle acque inteme Ferraresi. Introduzione allo studio dei ciliati e dei rotiferi. - Pubbl.
civ. Mus. Stor. nat. Ferrara. 4: l-154.
140

Literature
CANN (CLUB DES AMIS DE LA NATURE DE NEUCHATEL) (1907): Le lac de SaintBlaise - Histoire, hydrographie, faune des in-
vert6br6s. - Bull. Soc. neuchät. Geogr., 18: 5-46.
CANTER, H.M., HEANEY, S.I. & LUND, J.W.G. ( 1990): The ecological significance of grazing on planktonic populations of cyanobacte-
ria by the ciliate 1y'a^rsrr/a. - New Phytol., ll4:241-263.
CANTER, H.M., WALSBY, A.E., KINSMAN, R. & IBELINGS, B.W. (1992): The effect of attached vorticellids on the buoyancy of the co-
lonial cyanobacterium Anabaena lemnrcrnunnii. - Br. phycol. J.,27: 65-14.
CAPRIULO, G.M. ( 1982): Feeding of field collected tintinnid micro-zooplankton on natural food. - Mar. Biol., 71: 73-86.
CARBONELL, J.J. (1935): Some micrographic observations of the waters of the river plate. - Verh. int. Verein. theor. angew. Limnol.,7:
513-516.
CAREY, P.G. & MAEDA, M. ( 1985): Horizontal distribution of psammophilic ciliates in fine sediments of the Chichester harbour area. - J.
nat. Hist. (London), 19:555-5'74.
CARRIAS, J.-F., AMBLARD, C. & BOURDIER, G. ( 1994): Vertical and temporal heterogeneity of planktonic ciliated protozoa in a humic
lake. - J. Plankton Res., 16: 47 1485.
CARRIAS, J.-F., AMBLARD, C. & BOURDIER, G. (1996): Protistan bacterivory in an oligomesotrophic lake: importance of attached cilia-
tes and flagellates. - Microb. Ecol., 31: 249-268.
CARRIAS, J-F., AMBLARD, C. & BOURDIER, G. (1998): Seasonal dynamics and vertical distribution of planktonic ciliates and their rela-
tionship to microbial food resources in the oligomesotrophic Lake Pavin. - Arch. Hydrobiol.,l43:221 255.
CARRICK, H.J. & FAHNENSTIEL, G.L. (1990): Planktonic protozoa in Lake Huron and Michigan: seasonal abundance and composition
of ciliates and dinoflagellates. - J. Great Lakes Res., 16:319-329.
CARRICK, H.J., FAHNENSTIEL, G.L., STOERMER, E.F. & WETZEL, R.G. (1991): The importance of zooplzinkton-protozoan trophic
couplings in Lake Michigan. - Limnol. Oceanogr., 36: 1335 1345.
CARRICK, H.J., FAHNENSTIEL, G.L. & TAYLOR, W.D. (1992): Growth and production of planktonic protozoa in Lake Michigan: in situ
versus in vitro comparisons and importance to food web dynamics. - Limnol. Oceanogr., 37: l22l 1235.
CASPERS, H. & HECKMAN, C.W. ( 1982): The biota of a small standing water ecosystem in the Elbe flood plain. The role of districts free
from pesticide sprays as havens for endangered aquatic species. Arch. Hydrobiol., Suppl. 6l:221-316.
CASPERS, H. & SCHULZ, H. (1960): Studien zur Wertung der Saprobiensysteme. Erfahrungen an einem Stadtkanal Hamburgs. - Int. Re-
vue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr.,45: 535 565.
CASPERS, H. & SCHULZ, H. (1962): Weitere Unterlagen zur Prüfung der Saprobiensysteme. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr.,47:
100-l 17.
CASPERS, H. & SCHULZ, H. (1964): Die biologischen Verhältnisse der Elbe bei Hamburg. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 60: 53 88.
CATHEY, D.D., SIMMONS, G.M.Jr., PARKER, B.C., YONGUE, W.H.Jr. & VAN BRUNT, M.R. (1982): Protozoan colonization of artifi-
cial substrates in two Antarctic lakes. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 101: 353-361 .
CATTANEO, G. (1882): Sui protisti del Lago di Como. - Boll. scient., Pavia,3: lll-121.
CELA, A.M. ( 1972): Algunos ciliados vinculados a la vegetacion flotante. - Physis, B. Aires, 3l:. 559-511 .
CERQUEIRA DA SILVA, M.M. (1992): The periphyton community in River Cävado Portugal. - PublEoes Inst. Zool. Dr. Auguste Nobre,
N;'232: l-17.
CHANDRAN, M.R., CHANDRAN, K., JAYANTHI, M., SIVAKAMI, R. & VALLI, P. (1998): Limnological profile of ponds in tropical In-
dia. - Verh. int. Verein. theor. angew. Limno[., 26: 1529 1535.
CHARDEZ, D. (1976): Etudesur Colep.s lzilta.s NITZSCH (Protozoa Ciliata). - Bull. Rech. Agron. Gembloux, 11: 3-10.
CHARDEZ, D. ( 198 1): Les protozoaires cilies des fagnes. - Revue vervi6t. Hist. nat., 38: 5 l-58.
CHARDEZ, D. (1984): Protozoaires des eaux de la Vesdre a Verviers (Sarcomastigophora et Ciliophora). - Revue vervi6t. Hist. nat.,4l:
t8-22.
CHARDEZ, D. ( 1986): Protozoaires cilies de la Vesdre (Protozoa Ciliophora). - Revue vervi6t. Hist. nat., 43:. 19-24.
CHATTON, E. & DE BEAUCHAMP, P. (1923):Teuthophrys trisulca n. g.n. sp. infusoire p6lagique d'eau douce. - Archs Zool. exp. g6n.
(Notes et Revue), 6l: 123-129.
CHATTON, E. & DE BEAUCHAMP, P. (1924): Notes sur la faune de I'Alsace. II. Un infusoire p6lagique, type d'une fämille nouvelle
(Teuthophrys trisulta CHATT. et DE BEAUCH.), dans le Schiessrothried. - Bull. Ass. philomath. Als. Lorr., 6:285-292.
CHATTON, E. & LWOFF, A. (1930): Imprdgnation, par diffusion argentique, de l'infraciliature des cili6s marins et d'eau douce, aprös fixa-
tion cytologique et sans dessiccation. - C. r. S6anc. Soc. Biol., 104: 834-836.
CHATTON, E. & LWOFF, A. (1936): Techniques pour l'6tude des protozoaires, sp6cialement de leurs structures superficielles (cin6tome et
argyrome). Bull. Soc. fr. Microsc., 5:25-39.
CHIANG, S.-C. (1956): Notes on the freshwater Tintinnoinea from Kiangsu and Anhui provinces. - Acta hydrobiol. sin., l: 6l-87 (in Chi-
nese with English summary).
CHOI, J.W. & STOECKER, D.K. ( 1989): Effects of fixation on cell volume of marine planktonic protozoa. - Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 55:
t'761-1765.
CHORIK, F.P. ( 1968): Free-living ciliates in Moldavian water basins. Akad. Nauk MSSR, Kischinev. 25 I pp. (in Russian).
CHORIK, F.P. & VIKOL, M.M. (1973): Bottom-dwelling, free-living infusoria of the Kuchurgansk cooling plant of the Moldavian F. R. E.
S.. - Biologicheskie Resursy Vodoenoy Moldavii, ll: 56J2 (in Russian).
CHRISTOFFERSEN, K., AHL, T. & NYBROE, O. (1995): Grazing of nonindigenous bacteria by nano-sized protozoa in a natural coastal
system. - Microb. Ecol., 30:67-78.
CHRISTOPHER, M.H. & PATTERSON, D.J. (1983): Coleps hirtus, a ciliate illustrating facultative symbioses between protozoa and algae.
Annls Stn limnol. Besse, 17:218-296.
CIENKOWSKY, L. ( l88l ): Bericht über Exkursionen ins Weisse Meer. - Trudy imp. S-peterb. Obshch. Estest., 12: l3 l-l7l (in Russian).
74r

Literature
CLAMP, J.C. (1995): The life cycle of the planktonic peritrich ciliateVorticello natans and its significance to the systematics of the genus
Vorticella. - J. Euk. Microbiol. Suppl., 42: 394.
CLAPAREDE,6,. & lecHfraeNN, J. (1858): Etudes sur les infusoires er les rhizopodes. - M6m. Inst. narn. g6nev.,5 (year 1857): l-260.
CLAPAREDE, E. & IaCHUANN, J. (1859): Etudes sur les infusoires et les rhizopodes. - M6m. Inst. natn. g6nev.,6 (year 1858): 261482.
CLAPS, M.C. & MODENUTTI, B.E. (1984): Contribucion al conocimiento de los ciliados (Ciliophora Peritricha) dulceacuicolas de Argen-
tina. II. - Limnobios, 2: 581-585.
CL6MENT-IFTODE, F. & VERSAVEL, C. (1961): Teutophrys trisulca (CHATTON, DE BEAUCHAMP) cili6 planctonique rare. - Proti-
stologica, 3:457-464.
CLEVEN, E.-J. (1996): Indirectly fluorescently labelled flagellates (IFLF): a tool to estimate the predation on free-living heterotrophic fla-
gellates. - J. Plankton Res., 18: 429442.
COATS, D.W. & HEISLER, J.J. (1989): Spatial and temporal occurrence of the parasitic dinoflagellate Duhoscquella cachoni and its tintin-
nine host Eutintinnus pectlnls in Chesapeake Bay. - Mar. Biol., 101: 401-409.
COHN, F. ( 1866): Neue Infusorien im Seeaquarium. - Z. wiss. Zool.,16: 253-302.
COLE, C.A. ( 1955): An ecological study of the microbenthic fauna of two Minnesota lakes. - Am. Midl. Nat., 53: 213-230.
COLLIN, B. (1912):6tude monographique sur les acindtiens II Morphotogie, physiologie, syst6matique. - Archs Zool. exp. g6n., 5l: 145'r-.
CONN, H.W. (1905): A preliminary report on the protozoa of the fresh waters of Connecticut. Bult. Conn. St. geol. nat. Hist. Surv., No.2: 5 59.
CORDERO, E.H. (1922): Nota sobre algunos protozoarios del Uruguay. - Physis.6: I I4-l 18.
CORLISS, J.O. ( 1953): Silver impregnation of ciliated protozoa by the Chatton-Lwoff technic. - Stain Technol., 28: 97- 100.
CORLISS, J.O. (1956): On the evolution and systematics of ciliated protozoa. - Syst. Zool., 5: 68-140.
CORLISS, J.O. (1960): The problem ofhomonyms among generic names ofciliated protozoa, with proposal ofseveral new names. - J. Pro-
tozool.,7: 269-278.
CORLISS, J.O. (1961): The ciliated protozoa: characterization, classification, and guide to the literature. In KERKUT, G.A. (ed.): Internatio-
nal series ofmonographs on pure and applied biology, Volume 7. Pergamon Press, Oxford, London, New York, Paris. 310 pp.
CORLISS, J.O. (1979): The ciliated protozoa. Characterization, classification and guide to the literature.2nd ed. Pergamon Press, Oxford,
New York, Toronto, Sydney, Paris, Frankfurt. I-XVI & 455 pp.
CORLISS, J.O. & LOM, J. (1985): An annotated glossary of protozoological terms. In LEE, J.J., HUTNER, S.H. & BOVEE, E.C. (eds.): An
illustrated guide to the protozoa, pp. 516402. Society of Protozoologists, Lawrence.
COWELL,B.C.(1960):Aquantitativestudyof thewinterplanktonof Urschel'squarry.-OhioJ.Sci.,60:183-191.
CRAICIE, J. (1921): The ciliata. Trans. Proc. Perthsh. Soc. nat. Sci., 7: 107-l2l
CUNHA, A.M.DA (1913): ContribuiEäo para o conhecimento da fauna de protozoarios do Brazil (Beitraege zur Kenntnis der Protozoenfau-
na Brasiliens). - Mems Inst. Oswaldo Cruz,5: l0l-122 (in Portuguese and German).
CUNHA, A.M.DA (1916): ContribuiEäo para o conhecimento da fauna de protozoarios do Brazil IV. - Mems Inst. Oswaldo Cruz,8:
66-:12.
CUNHA, A.M.DA (1918): ContribuiEäo para o conhecimento da fauna de protozoarios do Brazil. - Mems Inst. Oswaldo Cruz, l0:
t92 193.
CURDS, C.R. (1969): An illustrated key to the British freshwater ciliated protozoa commonly found in activated sludge. - Wat. Pollut. Res.,
Technical Paper No. 12: I-IV, l-90.
CURDS, C.R. (1975): Protozoa. In CURDS, C.R. & HAWKES, H.A. (äds.): Ecological aspects of used-watertreatment. Volume [ - The or-
ganisms and their ecology, pp. 203-268. Academic Press, London, New York, San Francisco.
CURDS, C.R. (1982): British and other freshwater ciliated protozoa. Part I Ciliophora: Kinetofragminophora. Keys and notes for the identifi-
cation of the free-living genera. In KERMACK, D.M. & BARNES, R.S.K. (eds.): Synopses of the British Fauna (New Series). Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, London, New York, New Rochelle, Melbourne, Sydney. 387 pp.
CURDS, C.R. & COCKBURN, A. (1970a): Protozoa in biological sewage-treatment processes - L A survey of the protozoan fauna of Bri-
tish percolating filters and activated-sludge plants. - Wat. Res.,4:225-236.
CURDS, C.R. & COCKBURN, A. (1970b): Protozoa in biological sewage-treatment processes - II. Protozoa as indicators inthe activated-
sludge process. - Wat. Res., 4:231-249.
CURDS, C.R. & FEY, G.J. (1969): The effect of ciliated protozoa on the fate of Escherichia coli inthe activated-sludge process. - Wat.
Res.,3: 853 867.
CURTIS, E.J.C. & CURDS, C.R. (1971): Sewage fungus in rivers in the United Kingdom: the slime community and its constituent orga-
nisms. - Wat. Res., 5: I 14'7-1159.
CZAPIK, A. (1959): Microbenthos of fish-ponds in Mydlniki. - Acta hydrobiol., Krak6w, 1: 187-196.
CZAPIK, A. (1962): Mikrofauna slonawego jeziora Ptasi Raj (La microfaune du lac saumätre Ptasi Raj). - Polskie Archwm Hydrobiol., 10:
3'71-378 (in Polish with Russian and French summary).
CZAPIK, A. (1975): Les associations des cilids (Ciliata) dans le ruisseau Prqdnik pollu6 par les eaux residuelles d'une laiterie. - Acta hydro-
biol., Krakdw, 17: 2l-34.
CZAPIK, A. (1982): The effect of waste water on ciliate communities in the Biala Przemsza River. - Acta hydrobiol., Krak6w,24:29-31 .
CZAPIK, A. & FYDA, J. (1995): WstQppe badania nad mikro- i meiofaun4 suchar6w Wigierskiego Parku Narodowego (Micro- and meio-
fauna of dystrophic lakes in the Wigry National Park). - Przegl. zool., 39: 65J2 (in Polish with English summary).
CZAPIK, A. & JORDAN, A. (1976): Les observations sur les cili6s d'une mare. - Acta Protozool., 15:211-287.
CZERNIN-CHUDENITZ, C.W. (1958): Limnologische Untersuchungen des Rheinstromes. Band III Quantitative Phytoplanktonuntersu-
chungen. - ForschBer. Wi(.- u. VerkMinist. NRhein-Westf., Nr.536: l-224.
DADAY, E.v. (1885): Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Plattensee-Fauna. - Math. naturw. Ber. Ung.,3: 179-185.
DADAY, E.v. ( I 887): Monographie der Familie der Tintinnodeen. - Mitt. zool. Stn Neapel, 7: 473-591.
DADAY, E.v. ( 1892): Die mikroskopische Thierwelt der Mezös6ger Teiche. - Term6szetr. Fü2.,15: 166-201.
142

Literature
DADAY, E.v. ( l89U): Mikroskopische Süsswasserthiere aus Ceylon. Term6szetr. Fü2., 21 (Anhangsheft): l-121 .
DADAY, E.v. ( 1902): Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Süßwasser-Mikrofauna von Chile. - Term6szetr. Fiz.,25: 436447 .
DADAY, E.v. (1907): Plancton-Tiere aus dem Victoria Nyanza. Sammelausbeute von A. Borgeft, 1904-1905. -Zool. Jb. Syst.,25: 245-261.
DACAJEVA, V. (1930): Infusorien des Salzigen Sees der Bucht Kruglaja in der Nähe von Sebastopol (Krim). - Trudy sevastopol'. biol.
Sta., 2: 3l-46 (in Russian with German summary).
DALE, T. & BURKILL, P.H. (1982): « Live counting » - a quick and simple technique for enumerating pelagic ciliates. - Annls Inst. oc6a-
nogr.. Paris. 58: 261-276.
DALLA TORRE, K.W.V. (1891): Studien über die mikroskopische Thierwelt Tirols. III. Theil: Infusoria Ciliata und Tentaculifera HUX-
LEY. - Z. Ferdinand. Tirol, 3. Folge, 35. Heft: I 9 l-209.
DAVIS, C.C. ( 1973): A planktonic Epistylis fiom a Newtbundland lake. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 92: 666 669.
DAVIS, C.C. ( l97tt): Notes on zooplankton fiom some Labrador lakes. - Verh. int. Verein. theor. angew. Limnol., 20:233-239.
DELAGE, Y. & HEROUARD, E. ( 1896): La cellule et les protozoaires. Traitd Zoologie Concräte, Vol. I . Schleicher Fröres, Paris. 584 pp.
DELPHY, J.(1925): Monodiniunt pelllari, nov. sp. Bull. Soc. zool. Fr.,50:359-361.
DETCHEVA, R.B. (1972): Distribution des especes de cilies dans certains affluents Bulgares du Danube, aux eaux polluees. Annls Stn
limnol. Besse,6-7 (years l91lll9l2):261 269.
DETCHEVA, R. ( I975): Pollution influence on the infusorial fauna (Protozoa, Ciliata) of Bulgarian rivers il. The Ogosta river and its afflu-
ents. - Hydrobiology,2: I9-3 I (in Russian with English summary).
DETCHEVA, B. ( 1976): Nouveaux cilies pour la faune de la Bulgarie. - Annls Stn limnol. Besse, 10: 305-3 10.
DETCHEVA, R.B. (1976a): Les cilies de la riviere Kamtchia a l'eau polluee. - Annls Stn limnol. Besse, l0:299 304.
DETCHEVA, R.B. (1978): Aspects ecologiques des cilies de la riviere Mesta. - Annls Stn limnol. Besse, 1l (years 19771197 8): 300-309.
DETCHEVA, R. (1979a): Paramdtres saprobiologiques et hydrochimiques pour les cili6s de certains affluents Bulgares de la Mel Noire.
Hydrobiology, 9 : 51 --'7 3.
DETCHEVA, R. (1979b): Repartition des cilies de la riviere Strouma par rapport a certains facteurs abiotiques. Annls Stn limnol. Besse,
13:236-246.
DETCHEVA, R.B. (1981): Etude de la composition et de la r6partition saisonniöre des cili6s de la riviöre Maritza. - Hydrobiology, 14:
l 6-30.
DETCHEVA, R.B. (1982): Recherches, en Bulgarie, sur les cilies de certaines plages de la Mer Noire etdes rivieres y aboutissant. - Annls
Stn limnol. Besse, 15 (years l98l/1982): 231-253.
DETCHEVA, R.B. (1983a): L'inf'luence de la pollution sur la distribution des cili6s (Protozoa - Ciliata) de lzr riviöre de Vit - affluent Bulgare
du Danube. - Hidrobiologia, 17 : 348-361.
DETCHEVA, R.B. (1983b): Distribution des cili6s (Protozoa - Ciliata) par rapport ä la pollution hydrochimique de la riviöre d'Ossäm -
afTluent Bulgare du Danube. - Hidrobiologia, 17:362-380.
DETCHEVA, R.B. (1983c): Caracteristiques ecologiques des cilies de la riviere Maritza. - Annls Stn limnol. Besse, 16 (years 1982/1983):
200-219.
DETCHEVA, R.B. (1992): Catalogi Faunae Bulgaricae I Protozoa, Ciliophora. Academia Scientiarum Bulgaricae, Sofia. 134 pp.
DETCHEVA, R.B. (1993): Les donn6es 6cologiques pour les cili6s (Protozoa-Ciliophora) du bassin de Ia riviöre Iskar. - Khidrobiologiya,
38:.3344 (in Russian with French summary).
DETSCHEWA, R.B. (1972): Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Infusorienfauna (Protozoa-Ciliata) in den Binnengewässern Bulgariens. - Izv. zool.
Inst., Sof., 36:.61 19.
DETSCHEWA, R.B. (1972a): Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Infusorienfauna (Protozoa-Ciliata) in den Binnengewässem Bulgariens. lzv. zool.
Inst., Sof., 36:61-19.
DEVI, R.V. ( 1964): Cannibalism in Frontonia leuc'as EHR. - J. Protozool., ll:304-301 .
DICKMAN, M. ( 1968): Some indices of diversity. - Ecology, 49: L19l-l 193.
DIETZ, G. ( 1964): Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Ciliatenfauna einiger Brackwassertümpel (Etangs) der französischen Mittelmeerküste. - Vie Mi-
\ieu, 15: 47-93.
DILLON, R.D. & HOBBS, J.T. (1973): Estimating quantity and quality of the biomass of benthic protozoa. - Proc. S. Dak. Acad. Sci., 52:
4149.
DINGFELDER, J.H. (1962): Die Ciliaten vorübergehender Gewässer. - Arch. Protistenk., 105: 509-658.
DIXON, A. (1920): Protozoa. Second six months report on gatherings of protozoa from pond at Lawnhurst, Didsbury, collected tiom l2th
September, l9 I 8, to March I 3th, 1919. - Lancs. Chesh. Nat., 13: 21 35.
DOBBERFUHL, D.R., MILLER, R. & ELSER, J.J. (1997): Effects of cyclopoid copepod (Diacyclops thomasi) on phytoplankton and the
microbial food web. - Aquat. microb. Eco[., 12:29-37.
DOBROVLIANSKI, V.V. (1914): Verzeichnis der Süßwasser-Protozoen aus der Umgebung von Kiev. - Arbeiten der biologischen Dnjepr-
Station Kiev, l:3141 (in Russian).
DODGE, A.V. (19U2): Some observations on Ophrydiunt yersatile. - Microscopy, 34: 381-384.
DOFLEIN, F. (1909): Lehrbuch der Protozoenkunde. Eine Darstellung der Naturgeschichte der Protozoen mit besonderer Berücksichtigung
der parasitischen und pathogenen Fomen. 2nd ed. G. Fischer, Jena. 914 pp.
DOCIEL, Y.A. (1940): On the classification of the genus Trichodina. - Trudy leningr. Obshch. Estest., 68: 8-31 (in Russian with English
summary).
DOLAN, J.R. (1991): Guilds of ciliate microzooplankton in the Chesapeake Bay. - Estuar. Coastal Shelf Sci.,33: 137-152.
DOLAN, J. (1992): Mixotrophy in ciliates: a review of Chlorella symbiosis and chloroplast retention. - Marine Microbial Food Webs, 6:
I t5-132.
DOLAN, J.R. & COATS, D.W. ( 199 I ): A study of feeding in predacious ciliates using prey ciliates labeled with fluorescent microspheres. -
J. Plankton Res., 13: 609-621.
743

Literature
DOLAN, J.R. & GALLEGOS, C.L. (1991): Trophic coupling of rotifers, microflagellates, and bacteria during fall months in the Rhode Ri-
ver estuary. - Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 77: 147 156.
DÖRR, E. (1935): Beiträge zur Kenntnis der Hydrobiologie der Gewässer zwischen Niederrhein und Maas sowie ihrer Beziehungen zu die-
sen beiden Flüssen. - Arch. Hydrobiol.,28:492-513.
DOUCET, C.M. & MALY, E.J. ( 1990): Effect of copper on the interaction between the predator Didinium nasutum and its preyPat'anteciunt
t'audatum. - Can. J. Fish. aquat. Sci., 47: l122-1127.
DRAGESCO, J. ( 1960): Cili6s m6sopsammiques littoraux. Syst6matique, morphologie, 6cologie. - Trav. Stn biol. Roscoff, 122: 1-356.
DRAGESCO, J. (1962): Capture et ingestion des proies chez les infusoires cili6s. Bull. biol. Fr. Belg., 96: 123-167.
DRAGESCO, J. ( 1963): Compl6ments a la connaissance des cili6s m6sopsammiques de Roscoff. - Cah. Biol. mar.,4:251-2'75.
DRAGESCO,J.(1965):Cili6sm6sopsammiquesd'AfriqueNoire.-Cah. Biol.mar.,6:357-399.
DRAGESCO, J. (1966): Cili6s libres de Thonon et ses environs. - Protistologica,2:59-95.
DRAGESCO,J.(1966a):Observationssurquelquescillieslibres.-Arch.Protistenk.,l09:155-206.
DRAGESCO, J. (1970): Cilids libres du Cameroun. - Annls Fac. Sci. Univ. f6d. Cameroun (Num6ro Hors-s6rie): I l4l.
DRAGESCO, l. (1972a): Cili6s libres de la cuvette tchadienne. - Annls Fac. Sci. Univ. f6d. Cameroun, ll: '7 l-91 .
DRAGESCO, J. (1912b): Cili6s libres de l'Ouganda. - Annls Fac. Sci. Univ. f6d. Cameroun, 9: 87-126.
DRAGESCO, J. & DRAGESCO-KERN6IS, A. (1986): Cili6s libres de l'Afrique intertropicale. Introduction ä la connaissance et ä l'6tude
des cili6s. - Faune tropicale lEditions de l'ORSTOM), 26: l-559.
DRAGESCO, J. & DRAGESCO-KERNEIS, A. (1991): Free-living ciliates from the coastal area of Lake Tanganyika (Africa). - Europ. J.
Protistol.. 26: 21 6-235.
DRAGESCO, J., IFIODE, F. & FRYD-VERSAVEL, G. (1914): Contribution a la connaissance de quelques cili6s holotriches rhabdophores;
L Prostomiens. - Protistologica, l0: 5916.
DRYDEN, R.C. & WRIGHT, S.J.L. ( 1987): Predation of cyanobacteria by protozoa. - Can. J. Microbiol., 33: 411482.
D'UDEKEM, M.J. ( 1864): Description des infusoires de la Belgique. - M6m. Acad. r. Sci. Lett. Belg., 34: l-34.
DUJARDIN, F. (1841): Histoire naturelle des zoophytes. Infusoires, comprenant la physiologie et la classification de ces animaux, et la ma-
ni6re de les 6tudier a l'aide du microscope. Librairie Encyclop6dique de Roret, Paris. 684 pp.
DUNKERLY, J.S. (1913): A biological survey of Clare Island in the county of Mayo, Ireland and of the adjoining district. Section 3. Part
6l-62. Flagellata and Ciliata. - Proc. R. Ir. Acad., 3l: l-20.
DYER, B.D., GAJU, N., PEDRÖS-ALIÖ, C., ESTEVE, I. & GUERRERO, R. (1986): Ciliates from a fresh warer sulfurerum. - BioSystems,
19:127-135.
EATON, J.W. & CARR, N.G. (1980): Observations on the biology and mass occurrence of Ophrydium versatile (MÜLLER) (Citiophora:
Peritrichida) and associated algae in Lough Ree, Ireland. - Ir. Nat. J., 20: 55-59.
EBERHARD, E. ( 1862): Zweite Abhandlung über die Infusorienwelt. - Oster-Program der Realschule zu Coburg, year 1862'. l-26.
EBERLY, W.R. ( 1959): The metalimnetic oxygen maximum in Myers Lake. Invest. Indiana Lakes Streams, 5: 146.
EDDY, S. (1927):The plankton of Lake Michigan. Bull. Ill. St. nat. Hist. Surv., 17: 203-232.
EDMONDSON, C.H. (1906): The protozoa of Iowa. A study of species known to occur in the waters of this state. Proc. Davenport Acad.
Sci., 11: l-123.
EDMONDSON, C.H. (1910): A report on the fresh-water protozoa of Tahiti. - Science, 32:349-351.
EDMONDSON, C.H. (1920): Protozoa of the Devil's Lake Complex, North Dakota. Trans. Am. microsc. Soc.,39: 167-198.
EGGERT, M.B. ( 1968): Ecology and quantity of Holotricha and Peritricha of Selenginsky region of Lake Baikal. - Gidrobiol. Zh., Saratov,
4:24-34 (in Russian with English summary).
EHLERS, H. (1965): Über das Plankton des Großen Heiligen Meeres und des Erdfallsees bei Hopsten (Westf.). - Abh. Landesmus. Naturk.
Münster. 27:3-20.
EHRENBERG, C.G. (1830): Beiträge zur Kenntniß der Organisation der Infusorien und ihrer geographischen Verbreitung, besonders in Si-
birien. - Abh. dt. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, year 1830: l-88.
EHRENBERG, C.G. (1831): Über die Entwickelung und Lebensdauer der Infusionsthiere; nebst femeren Beiträgen zu einer Vergleichung
ihrer organischen Systeme. - Abh. dt. Akad. Wiss. Berlin, year 1831: l-154.
EHRENBERG, C.G. (1833): Dritter Beitrag zur Erkenntniß großer Organisation in der Richtung des kleinsten Raumes. - Abh. dt. Akad.
Wiss. Berlin, year 1833: 145-336.
EHRENBERG, C.G. (1838): Die Infusionsthierchen als vollkommene Organismen. Ein Blick in das tiefere organische Leben der Natur. L.
Voss, Leipzig. 548 pp.
EICHWALD, E.V. (1849): Zweiter Nachtrag zur Infusorienkunde Russlands. - Bull. Soc. imp6r. nat. Moscou, 22:400 548.
EICHWALD, E. (1852): Dritter Nachtrag zur Infusorienkunde Russlands. - Bull. Soc. imp6r. nat. Moscou,25: 388-536.
ELLIOTT, P.B. & BAMFORTH, S.S. (1975): Interstitial protozoa and algae of Louisiana salt marshes. - J. Protozool., 22:514-519.
ELORANTA, P. (1980): Zooplankton in a watercourse polluted by a sulphite pulp mill. - Ann. Zool. Fennici, 17:261-261 .
ENGELMANN, T.W. (1862): Zur Naturgeschichte der Infusionsthiere. -2. wiss. Zool.,ll:34'7-393.
ENRIQUES, P. (1908): Sulla morfologia e sistematica del genere Colpoda. - Archs Zool. exp. g6n., 8 (Notes et Revue): l-15.
ENRIQUES, P. (1912): Notizie su un vorticellide raro(Astylozoon pyriJbrntis SCHEW.) e sulla suaconiugazione. -Rc. Sess. Accad. Sci. Ist.
Bologna, years 1911-1912:93 103.
ENRIQUES, P. (1913): Ricerche biologiche sugli infusori dei dintorni di Bologna. Nota seconda. - Rc. Sess. Accad. Sci. Ist. Bologna, 17
(years l9l2ll9l3): 103-l 17.
ENTZ, G. ( I 882): Beiträge zur Kenntnis der Infusorien. - Z. wiss. Zool., 38: 167-189.
ENTZ, G. ( I 884): Über Infusorien des Golfes von Neapel. - Mitt. zool. Stn Neapel, 5: 289444.
ENTZ, G. (1885): Zur näheren Kenntnis der Tintinnoden. - Mitt. zool. Stn Neapel., 6: 185-216.
ENTZ, G. (1904): Einiges über das Variieren der Infusorien. - Math. nalurw. Ber. Ung., 19 (year l90l): 125-144.
744

Literatr-rre
ENTZ. G. ( 1909a): Studien über Organisation und Biologie der Tintinniden. - Arch. Protistenk., 15: 93-226.
ENTZ, G. (1909b): Die Süsswasser-Tintinniden. - Math. naturw. Ber. Ung., 25: 191-225.
ENTZ, G. & SEBESTY6,N, O. ( 1946): Das Leben des Balaton-Sees. - Arb. ung. biol. Forschlnst., 16: 11941l.
ERLANGER, R.v. ( 1890): Zur Kenntnis einiger Inf usorien. - Z. wiss. Zool., 49: 649-662.
ERTL, M., ERTLOVÄ, E., LÄC, J. & VRANOVSKV, M. (1961): Lireraturübersicht der Hydrofauna des rschechoslowakischen Abschnirts
der Donau während der Jahre l9lU-1958. - Biol6gia, Bratisl., 16: 57-73.
ESCOMEL, F.. (1929): Protozoarios de las aguas de Arequipa. Fauna de Arequipa, year 1929: 16-32.
ESTEBAN, G.F. & FINLAY. B.J. (1996): Morphology and ecology of the cosmopolitan ciliate Prorotlon yiridis. - Arch. Protistenk., 147:
Itil-188.
ESTEBAN, G.,TqLLEZ, C. & MUNOZ, A. ( l9tt9): Lit'e cycle, morphology, and infiaciliature of Enclosphact'a enge ln,tnni'. a palasitic suc-
torian of peritrichs. - J. Protozool. Suppl., 36: l0A, Abstract 57.
ESTEBAN, G., FINLAY, B.J. & EMBLEY, T.M. ( 1993a): New species double the diversity of anaerobic ciliates in a Spanish lake. FEMS
Microbiology Letters, 109: 93-99.
ESTEBAN, G., GUHL, B.E., CLARKE, K.J., EMBLEY, T.M. & FINLAY, B.J. (1993b): Cyt'lidiunt porcatum n. sp.'. a fiee-living anaerobic
scuticociliate containing a stable complex of hydrogenosomes, Eubacteria and Archaeobacteria. Europ. J. Protistol., 29:262-210.
ESTEBAN, G.F., FINLAY, 8.J., OLMO, J.L. & TYLER, P.A. ( 1999): Lenthodion turrotunt: a large, benthic, new ciliate? J. Euk. Micro-
biol.,46: -lA, Abstract 17.
EVANS, F.R. ( I 958): Competition fbr fbod between two carnivorous ciliates. Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 77: 390-395.
EVARTS,H.C.(1880):Anewspecies of Ophr'-tliunt.(O1tht 1-diuntAda).-Am.mon.microsc.J., l: l--5.
FABRE-DOMERGUE, P.L. (1888): Recherches anatomiques et physiologiques sur les infusoires cili6s. Annls Sci. nat. (56r.7,Zool.),5:
l-140.
FALKNER, H. ( 195 I ): Der Nahrungserwerb von Coleps hirtus. Dissertation Universität Wien. 43 pp.
FAURE-FREMIET, E. ( 1906): Sur une nouvelle vorticellide, Opisthonctta henne,quyi. - C. r. S6anc. Soc. Biol., 60: 922 923.
FAURE-FREMIET, E. ( I 920): Sur une nouvelle vorticellide planktonique Vortit'ella nnyeri. - Bull. Soc. zool. Fr., 45: 103- I 04.
FAURE-FREMIET,E.(1924):Contributionalaconnaissancedesinfusoiresplanktor.riques.-Bull.biol.Fr.Belg.Suppl.,6: l-171.
FAURE-FREMIET, E. (1945): Polymorphisme dt Monotliniun lolz-r', nov. sp. Bull. Soc. zool. Fr., 70:69-79.
FAURE-FREMIET, E. (1948): Croissance et morphogenese des colonies de"Carthesiunt linmetitunt" SVEC. - Anais Acad. bras. Cienc.,
20: 103-l l-5.
FAURE-FREMIET, E. ( 1950): Die Ökologie der Ziliateninf usorien. - Endeavour', 9: 185-189.
FAU R6,-FREM IET, E. ( 1953 ): La bipartition 6nantiotrope chez les cili6s oligotriches. - Archs Anat. microsc. Morph. exp., 42: 209-225.
FAURE-FREMIET, E. (1961): Le cytoplasme stomo-pharyngien des cili6s cyrtophores. - C. r. hebd. S6anc. Acad. Sci., Paris,253:
357 -362.
FAUR6,-FREMIET, E. (l96la): Documents et observations 6cologiques et pratiques sur la culture des inf'usoires cili6s. Hyclrobiologia, l8:
300-320.
FAUR6,-FREMIET, E., ANDRE, J. & GANIER, M.-C. ( 1968): Calcification r6gumentaire chez les cili6s du genre Coleps NITZSCH. - J.
Microscopie, 7 : 693-1 04.
FEHLMANN, J.W. (1912): Die Tiefenfäuna des Luganer Sees. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr.,5 (Biol. Suppl. Serie 4): l-52.
FELIP, M., SATTLER, B., PSENNER, R. & CATALAN, J. ( 1995t: Highly active microbial communities in the ice and snow cover of high
mountain lakes. - Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 6l:2394-2401.
FENCHEL, T. (1980): Suspension f'eeding in ciliated protozoa: structure and function of feeding organelles. - Arch. Protistenk., 123:
239-260.
FENCHEL, T. ( I 987): Ecology of Protozoa. The biology of fiee-living phagotrophic protists. Science Tech Publishers, Madison. l-X & 191
pp.
FENCHEL, T. & FINLAY, B.J. (1983): Respiration rates in heterotrophic, free-living protozoa. Microb. Ecol., 9:99-122.
FENCHEL, T. & FINLAY, B.J. (199-5): Ecology and evolution in anoxic worlds. Oxford University Press, Oxford, New York, Tokyo. I XII
&276pp.
FENCHEL, T., BERNARD, C., ESTEBAN, G., FINLAY, 8.J., HANSEN, P.J. & IVERSEN, N. (1995): Microbial diversity and activity in a
Danish Fjord with anoxic deep water. - Ophelia, 43: 45-100.
FERNANDEZ-GALIANO, D. (1976): Silver implegnation of ciliated protozoa: procedure yielding good results with the pyridinated silver
carbonate method. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 95: 557-560.
FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS, G. & ANTONIO-GARCIA, M.T. (1986): Interaction lead-zinc in a natural community of protozoans. - Acta
Protozool., 25: 195 2l l.
FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS, C. & ANTONIO-GARCiA, M.T. (1988): Effects of lead and cadmium in a community of protozoans. - Acra
Protozool.. 27: l4l 159.
FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS, G. & NOVILLO, A. (1994): Three new species of ciliate in the genera Pseudocohnilantbus, Plcttronema, and
Urotricha (Ciliophora). - Proc. biol. Soc. Wash., 107:221-238.
FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS, G., ANTONIO-GARCIA, M.T. & CORPAS-VAZQUEZ, I. (1985): The effects of lead on some protozoan
communities. Ciliates of the Santillana Reservoir and Ciudad Universitaria (Madrid, Spain). - Acta Protozool., 24:85-109.
FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS, G., ANTONIO-GARCIA, M.T. & CORPAS VASQUEZ, I. (1987): Les effets de trois cations (plomb, zinc,
mercure) sur une communaut6 de protozoaires cili6s. Dynamique des populations et capacitd bioindicatrice. - Annls Sci. nat. (Zool.), I 3"
S6rie, 8 (years 1986 1987): 113-189.
FERNANDEZ-LEBORANS, G., CASTRO DE ZALDUMBIDE, M. & PERALES, C. (1990): Biomass and functional distribution according
to the feeding modes oftwo freshwater protozoan communities. - lnt. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 75:501-532.
745

Literature
FERRARI, L, FARABEGOLI, A. & MAZZONI, R. (1989): Abundance and diversity of planktonic rotifers in the Po River. - Hydrobiologia,
186ll87:20t-2O8.
FINDENEGG, I. (1933): Zur Naturgeschichte des Wörthersees. - Carinthia II,l23ll24 (Sonderheft): l-62.
FINDENEGG, I. (1943): Untersuchungen über die Ökologie und die Produktionsverhältnisse des Planktons im Kämtner Seengebiete. - Int.
Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 43:368429.
FINDENEGG, I. (1953): Kämtner Seen naturkundlich betrachtet. Carinthia II, 15. Sonderheft: l-101.
FINLAY, B.J. (1977): The dependence of reproductive rate on cell size and temperature in freshwater ciliated protozoa. - Oecologia
(Berlin). 30: 75-8 l.
FINLAY, B.J. (1981): Oxygen availability and seasonal migrations of ciliated protozoa in a freshwater lake. J. gen. Microbiol., 123:
173-118.
FINLAY, B.J. ( 1982): Procedures for the isolation, cultivation and identification of protozoa. In BURNS, R.G. & SLATER, J.H. (eds.): Ex-
perimental microbial ecology, pp.44-65. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford.
FINLAY, B.J. & ESTEBAN, G.F. (1998): Planktonic ciliate species diversity as an integral component of ecosystem function in a freshwater
pond. - Protist, L49: 155-165.
FINLAY, 8.J., CLARKE, K.J., COWLING, A.J., HINDLE, R.M., ROGERSON, A. & BERNINGER, U.-G. (1988): On the abundance and
distribution of protozoa and their food in a productive freshwater pond. Europ. J. Protistol., 23:2O5-211 .
FINLAY,8.J., CLARKE, K.J., VICENTE, E. & MIRACLE, M.R. (1991): Anaerobic ciliates from a sulphide-rich solution lake in Spain. -
Europ. J. Protistol., 27: 148-159.
FINLAY, B.J.,T6LLEZ, C. & ESTEBAN, G. (1993): Diversity of free-living ciliates in the sandy sediment of a Spanish stream in winter. -
J. gen. Microbiol., 139 : 2855-2863.
FINLAY, B.J., MABERLY, S.C. & ESTEBAN, G.F. (1996): Spectacular abundance of ciliates in anoxic pond water: contribution of sym-
biont photosynthesis to host respiratory oxygen requirements. - FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 20: 229-235.
FINLAY, 8.J., CORLISS, J.O., ESTEBAN, G. & FENCHEL, T. (1996a): Biodiversity at the microbial level: the number of free-living cilia-
tes in the biosphere. - Q. Rev. Biol., 71: 221 237 .
FINLEY, H.E. ( 1930): Toleration of fresh water protozoa to increased salinity. Ecology, ll: 331-341 .
FINLEY, H.E. & MCLAUGHLIN, D. (1965): Cultivation of the peritrich Telotrochidium henneguyi in axenic and non-axenic media. -J.
Protozool.. 12: 4147.
FINLEY, H.E., RANGANATHAN, V.S. & SMALL,E.B. (1972): Examination of the peritrich crliateTelotrochidiumby scanning electron
microscopy. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 91: 492-501. I
FLEURY, A. & FRYD-VERSAVEL, G. (1984): Unitd et diversit6 chez les hypotriches (Protozoaires cili6s) L - Approche morphog6n6tique
par l'6tude de quelques formes peu diff6renci6es. - Protistologica,20:525-546.
FLEURY, A., IF-IODE, F., DEROUX, G. & FRYD-VERSAVEL, G. (1985): Unit6 et diversit6 chez les hypotriches (Protozoaires cili6s): II -
El6ments d'ultrastructure compar6e chez divers repr6sentants du sous-ordre des Euhypotrichina. - Protistolo gica, 2l: 505-524.
FLÖSSNER, D., KASPRZAK, P., MOTHES, G., RoNNEBERGER, D. & scHÖNBoRN, w. (1985): The inverrebrare communiries. In
CASPERS, S.J. (ed.): Lake Stechlin. A temperate oligotrophic lake, pp. 213-259. Junk Publishers, Dordrecht, Boston, Lancaster.
FOISSNER, W. (1974): Die Wimpertiere (Ciliata) und ihr Silberliniensystem. Das neuroformative System als Urstufe des Nervensystems in
der Haut Einzelliger (Protozoa). - Katalog des Oberösterreichischen Landesmuseums Linz, Nr. 89: l-68.
FOISSNER, W. ( 1975): Opisthonectidae (Ciliata, Peritrichida) nov. fam. und Revision der Genera Telotrochidium (KENT) und Opistho-
necrz (FAURE-FREMIET). - Protistologica ,ll: 395414.
FOISSNER, W . (1917): Revisiön der Genera Asry lozoon (ENGELMANN) und Hastatella (ERLANGER) (Ciliata Natantina). - Protistologi-
ca, 13: 353-379.
FOISSNER, W. (1978): Das Silberliniensystem und die Infraciliatur der Gattungen Platyophrya KAHL, 1926, Cyrtolophosis STOKES,
I 885 und Colpoda O.F.M., 1786: Ein Beitrag zur Systematik der Colpodida ( Ciliata, Vestibulifera). - Acta Protozool., 17: 215-231 .
FOISSNER, W. ( 1979a): Wimpertiere als Bioindikatoren. - ÖKO-L, Zeitschrift ftir Ökologie, Natur- und Umweltschutz, 4: 3-7.
FOISSNER, W. (1979b): Peritriche Ciliaten (Protozoa: Ciliophora).aus alpinen Kleingewässem.-Zool. Jb. Syst., 106: 529-558.
FOISSNER, W. (1979c): Ökologische und systematische Studien über das Neuston alpiner Kleingewässer, mit besonderer Berücksichtigung
der Ciliaten. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 64:99-140.
FOISSNER, W. (1979d): Morphologie, Infraciliatur und Silberliniensystem von Phascolodon vorticella STEIN, Chlamydonella alpestris
nov. spec. und Trochilia minuta (ROIJX) (Ciliophora, Cyrtophorida). - Protistologica, 15: 557-563.
FOISSNER, W. (1979e): Über ein Massenauftreten von Ophrydium eutrophit um nov. spec. (Cilophora, Peritrichida) und Cristatella mucedo
CUVIER (Bryozoa, Cristatellidae) in zwei Voralpenseen (Wallersee, Fuschlsee). - Ber. Nat.-Med: Ver. Salzburg, 314:95-100.
FOISSNER, W. (1980a): Taxonomische Studien über die Ciliaten des Grossglocknergebietes (Hohe Tauem, Österreich). IX. Ordnungen He-
terotrichida und Hypotrichida. - Ber. Nat.-Med. Ver. Salzburg, 5:11-117 .
FOISSNER, W. ( 1980b): Artenbestand und Struktur der Ciliatenzönose in alpinen Kleingewässern (Hohe Tauem. Österreich). - Arch. Proti-
stenk., 123: 99-126.
FOISSNER, W. ( 1980c): Colpodide Ciliaten (Protozoa: Ciliophora) aus alpinen Böden. - Zool. Jb. Syst., I07:391432.
FOISSNER, W. (1982): Ökologie und Taxonomie der Hypotrichida (Protozoa: Ciliophora) einiger östereichischer Böden. - Arch. Proti-
stenk.,126: l9-143.
FOISSNER, W. ( 1983): Taxonomische Studien über die Ciliaten des Großglocknergebietes lHohe Tauern, Österreich) I. Familien Holophry-
idae, Prorodontidae, Plagiocampidae, Colepidae, Enchelyidae und Lacrymariidae nov. fam. - Annln naturh. Mus. Wien, 84/B (year
1980):49-85.
FOISSNER, W. (1984): Infraciliatur, Silberliniensystem und Biometrie einiger neuer und wenigbekannter terrestrischer, limnischer und ma-
riner Ciliaten (Protozoa: Ciliophora) aus den Klassen Kinetofragminophora, Colpodea und Polyhymenophora. - Stapfia, 12: l-165.
746

Literature
FOISSNER, W. (1984a): Morphologie und Infraciliatur einiger limnischer Ciliaten (Protozo: Ciliophora). - Schweiz. Z. Hydrol.,46:
210 223.
FOISSNER, W. (1987a): Soil protozoa: fundamental problems, ecological significance, adaptations in ciliates and testaceans, bioindicators,
and guide to the literature. Progr. Protistol., 2:69-212.
FOISSNER, W. (1987b): Miscellanea nomenclatorica ciliatea (Protozoa: Ciliophora). - Arch. Protistenk., 133: 219-235.
FOISSNER, W. (1987c): Neue und wenig bekannte hypotriche und colpodide Ciliaten (Protozoa: Ciliophora) aus Böden und Moosen. -
Zool. Beirr. (N. F.),31: 187-282.
FOISSNER, W. (1988a): Taxonomic and nomenclatural revision of Slädeöek's list of ciliates (Protozoa: Ciliophora) as indicators of water
quality. - Hydrobiologia, 166: l-64.
FOISSNER, W. (1988b): Cemeinsame Arten in der terricolen Ciliatenfauna (Protozoa: Ciliophora) von Australien und Afrika. Stapfia, 17:
85-l 33.
FOISSNER, W. (1989): Morphologie und lnfiaciliatur einiger neuer und wenig bekannter terestrischer und limnischer Ciliaten (Protozoa,
Ciliophora). Sber. öst. Akad. Wiss., 196 (year 1987): 173-247.
FOISSNER, W. (1991): Basic light and scanning electron microscopic methods for taxonomic studies of ciliated protozoa. - Europ. J. Proti-
stol.,27:3 I 3*330.
FOISSNER, W. (1993): Colpodea (Ciliophora). - Protozoenfauna,4ll:l-X, l-798.
FOISSNER, W. ( 1994): Progress in taxonomy of planktonic freshwater ciliates. - Marine Microbial Food Webs, 8: 9-35.
FOISSNER, W. (1994a): Spetazoon australiense nov. gen., nov. spec., ein neues Wimpertier (Protozoa, Ciliophora) von Australien. - Kata-
loge des O. Ö. Landesmuseums Linz, Neue Folge, 7l:267 218.
FOISSNER, W. (1995): Tropical protozoan diversity: 80 ciliate species (Protozoa, Ciliophora) in a soil sample from a tropical dry forest of
Costa Rica, with descriptions of four new genera and seven new species. - Arch. Protistenk., 145: 37-79.
FOISSNER, W. (1996): Symphorionte Wimpertiere (Protozoa, Ciliophora) auf Großen Kiemenfußkrebsen (Crustacea, Branchiopoda). -
Sraplia.42: 59-69.
FOISSNER, W. (1996a): Faunistics, taxonomy and ecology of moss and soil ciliates (Protozoa, Ciliophora) from Antarctica, with description
of new species, including Pleuroplitoides smithi gen. n., sp. n. - Acta Protozool., 35l 95-123.
FOISSNER, W. (1996b): Ontogenesis in ciliated protozoa, with emphasis on stomatogenesis. In HAUSMANN, K. & BRADBURY, P.C.
(eds.): Ciliates: Cells as Organisms, pp. 95-177. G. Fischer, Stuttgart, Jena, Lübeck, Ulm.
FOISSNER, W. (1997): Faunistic and taxonomic studies on ciliates (Protozoa, Ciliophora) from clean rivers in Bavaria (Gerynany), with
descriptions of new species and ecological notes. - Limnologica (Berlin), 27: l'79-238.
FOISSNER, W. (1997a): Protozoa as bioindicators in agroecosystems, with emphasis on farming practices, biocides, and biodiversity. -
Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 62:. 93-103.
FOISSNER, W. (1997b): Global soil ciliate (Protozoa, Ciliophora) diversity: a probability-based approach using large sample collections
from Africa, Australia and Antarctica. - Biodiversity and Consveration,6: 162'7-1638
FOISSNER, W. (1998): An updated compilation of world soil ciliates (Protozoa, Ciliophora), with ecological notes, new records, and
descriptions of new species. - Europ. J. Protistol., 34: 195-235.
FOISSNER, W. (1998a): Two new soil ciliates (Protozoa, Ciliophora) from Namibia: Diplites telmatobius nov. gen., nov. spec. and
Apohryophyllum etoschense nov. spec. - Quekett Journal of Microscopy,3S: 207-218.
FOISSNER, W. (1999): Notes on the soil ciliate biota (Protozoa, Ciliophora) from the Shimba Hills in Kenya (Africa): diversity and descrip-
tion of three new genera and ten new species. - Biodiversity and Conservation, 8: 3 I 9-389.
FOISSNER, W. & ADAM, H. (1979): Die Bedeutung der stagnierenden Kleingewässer im alpinen Ökosystem. - Jb. Univ. Salzburg, years
1911-1979: 147-158.
FOISSNER, W. & ADAM, H. ( l98l ): Morphologie und Infraciliatur.:ron Parafurgasonia sorex (PENARD, 1922) nov. gen. und Ohertrumia
georgiana (DRAGESCO, 1972)nov.gen. (Protozoa: Ciliophora). -Zool. An2.,207:303-319.
FOISSNER, W. & BERGER, H. (1996): A user-friendly guide to the ciliates (Protozoa, Ciliophora) commonly used by hydrobiologists as
bioindicators in rivers, lakes, and waste waters, with notes on their ecology. - Freshwat. Biot., 35: 375482.
FOISSNER, W. & BROZEK, S. (1996): Taxonomic characterization of Pseudohaplocaulus infravatuolatus nov. spec. and Vorticella c'hlo-
rellata STILLER 1940, epiplanktonic peritrichs (Ciliophora, Peritrichia) attached to coenobia of Anabaena (Cyanophyta), including a
redescription of V. chlorostigma (EHRENBERG, 1 83 I ). - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 8l: 329-351.
FOISSNER, W. & DRAGESCO, J. (1996): Updating the trachelocercids (Ciliophora, Karyorelictea). I. A detailed description of the infraci-
liature of Trachelolophos glgas n. g., n. sp. and T. filum (DRAGESCO & DRAGESCO-KERN6IS, 1986) n. comb. - J. Euk. Microbiol.,
43: 12-25.
FOISSNER, W. & FOISSNER, I. ( 1988): The fine structure of Fusc'heria terricola BERGER et al., 1983 and a proposed new classification
of the subclass Haptoria CORLISS, 1974 (Ciliophora, Litostomatea). - Arch. Protistenk., 135: 213-235.
FOISSNER, W. & FOISSNER, I. (1988a): Stamm: Ciliophora. - Catalogus Faunae Austriae,l c: 1-147.
FOISSNER, W. & FOISSNER, L (1995): Fine structure and systemtic position of Enchelyom.orpha vermiculari.i (SMITH, 1899) KAHL,
1930, an anaerobic ciliate (Protozoa, Ciliophora) from domestic sewage. - Acta Protozool., 34:.21-34.
FOISSNER, W. & MOOG, O. (1992): Die Gewässergüte der Unteren Traun im Spiegel ihrer Wimpertier-Gesellschaften. - Kataloge des O.
Ö. Landesmuseums Linz, Neue Folge, 54:99-lO7 .
FOISSNER, W. & O'DONOGHUE, P.J. (1990): Morphology and infraciliature of some freshwater ciliates (Protozoa: Ciliophora) from We-
stem and South Australia. - Inveft. Taxon., 3: 661-696.
FOISSNER, W. & PEER, T. (1985): Protozoologische Untersuchungen an Almböden im Gasteiner Tal (Zentralalpen, Österreich). I. Charak-
teristik der Taxotope, Faunistik und Autökologie der Testacea und Ciliophora. - Veröff. Österr. MaB-Programms. 9:21-50.
FOISSNER, W. & PFISTER , G. (199'7): Taxonomic and ecologic revision of urotrichs (Ciliophora, Prostomatida) with three or more caudal
cilia, including a user-friendly key. - Limnologica (Berlin), 27:3ll'-347 .
141

Literature
FOISSNER, W. & SCHIFFMANN, H. (1974): Vergleichende Studien an argyrophilen Strukturen von vierzehn peritrichen Ciliaten. - Proti-
stologica, 10: 489-508.
FOISSNER, W. & SCHIFFMANN, H. (1975): Biometrische und morphologische Untersuchungen über die Variabilität von argyrophilen
Strukturen bei peritrichen Ciliaten. - Protistologica, ll: 415428.
FOISSNER, W. & WILBERT, N. (1979): Morphologie, Infraciliatur und Ökologie der limnischen Tintinnina: Tintinnidium.fluylatile STEIN,
Tintinnidium pusillum ENTZ, Tintinnopsis cylindrata DADAY wd Codonella cratera (LEIDY) (Ciliophora, Polyhymenophora). - J.
Protozool., 26: 90-103.
FOISSNER, W. & WÖLFL, S. (1994): Revision of the genus S/enlor OKEN (Protozoa, Ciliophora) and description of S. araut'anus nov.
spec. from South American lakes. - J. Plankton Res., 16: 255-289.
FOISSNER, W., ADAM, H. & FOISSNER, I. (1982): Daten zur Autökologie der Ciliaten stagnierender Kleingewässer im Grossglocknerge-
biet (Hohe Tauern, Österreich). - Ber. Nat.-Med. Ver. Salzburg, 6: 81-101.
FOISSNER, W., ADAM, H. & FOISSNER, I. (1984): Morphologie und Infraciliatur von Ophrydium eutrophicunt FOISSNER, 1979 und
Ophrydiunt versatile (O. F. MÜLLER, 1786) (Ciliophora, Peritrichida). - Ber. Nat.-Med. Ver. Salzburg, 7: 43-54.
FOISSNER, W., PEER, T. & ADAM, H. (1985): Pedologische und protozoologische Untersuchung einiger Böden des Tullnerfeldes (Nie-
derösterreich). - Mitt. öst. bodenk. Ges., 30:77-l1'7.
FOISSNER, W., SKOGSTAD, A. & PRATT, J.R. (1988): Morphology and infraciliature of Trochiliopsis australis n. sp., Pelagohalteria vi-
ridi.s (FROMENTEL, 1876) n. g., n. comb., and Strobilidium lacustris n. sp. (Protozoa, Ciliophora). - J. Protozool., 35: 489497 .
FOISSNER, W., OLEKSIV, I. & MÜLLER, H. ( 1990): Morphologie und Infraciliatur einiger Ciliaten (Protozoa: Ciliophora) aus stagnieren-
den Gewässem. - Arch. Protistenk., 138: 19l-206.
FOISSNER, W., BLATTERER, H., BERGER, H. & KOHMANN, F. (1991): Taxonomische und ökologische Revision der Ciliaten des Sa-
probiensystems - Band I: Cyrtophorida, Oligotrichida, Hypotrichia, Colpodea. - Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Was-
serwirtschaft, Ll91^: 14'7 8.
FOISSNER, W., UNTERWEGER, A. & HENSCHEL, T. (1992a): Comparison of direct stream bed and artificial substrate sampling of cilia-
tes (Protozoa, Ciliophora) in a mesosaprobic river. - Limnologica (Berlin), 22: 91 104.
FOISSNER, W., UNTERWEGER, A. & HENSCHEL, T. (1992b): Beitrag zur Ciliatenfauna (Protozoa: Ciliophora) einiger Seitenbäche der
Amper (Oberbayern, Deutschland). - Lauterbomia, Heft 9: 45-57 .
FOISSNER, W., BERGER, H. & KOHMANN, F. (1992c): Taxonomische und ökologische Revision der Ciliaten des Saprobiensystems -
Band II: Peritrichia, Heterotrichida, Odontostomatida. - Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, 5192:
t-502.
FOISSNER, W., BERGER, H. & KOHMANN, F. (1994): Taxonomische und ökologische Revision der Ciliaten des Saprobiensystems -
Band III: Hymenostomata, Prostomatida, Nassulida. - Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft, ll94: l-548.
FOISSNER, W., BERGER, H., BLATTERER, H. & KOHMANN, F. (1995): Taxonomische und ökologische Revision der Ciliaten des Sa-
probiensystems - Band IV: Gymnostomatea, Loxodes, Suctoria. - Informationsberichte des Bayer. Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft,
1/95: l-540.
FORBES, S.A. ( 189 I ): A preliminary report on the aquatic invertebrate fauna of the Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming, and of the flat-
head region of Montana. - Bull. US Fish. Comm., ll:2O1-258.
FOREL, F.-A. (1904): Le L6man. Monographie limnologique. F. Rouge & Ci". Lausanne. 715 pp.
FRANC6, R. ( 1897): L Section. Protozoen. In ENTZ, G. (ed.): Resultate der wissenschaftlichen Erforschung des Balatonsees. Zweiter Band.
Die Biologie des Balatonsees und seiner Umgebung. Erster Theil. Die Fauna des Balatonsees, pp. 1- 64. E. Hölzel, Wien.
FRANKENBERG, G.v. (1937): Beobachtungen anOphrydiumversatile. -Mikrokosmos,30 (years 19361193'7):189-191.
FRESENIUS, G. (1865): Die Infusorien des Seewasseraquariums. - Zool. Gart., Frankf., 6: 8l-89,l2l-129.
FREY, D.G. (1964): Remains of animals in quatemary lake and bog sediments and their interpretation. - Arch. Hydrobiol. Beih. Ergebn.
Limnol. Planktonk., 2: l-l 14.
FROMENTEL, E.de (1874-1876): Etudes sur les microzoaires ou infusoires proprement dits comprenant de nouvelles recherches sur leur
organisation, leur classification et la description des espöces nouvelles ou peu connus. G. Masson, Paris. 364 pp.
FRYD-VERSAVEL, G., IFIODE, F. & DRAGESCO, J. (1975): Contribution a la connaissance de quelques cili6s gymnostomes II. Prosto-
miens, pleurostomiens: morphologie, stomatogenöse. - Protistologica, 11: 509-530.
GABEL, G. (1927): A preliminary list of protozoa found in Cleveland County, Oklahoma. - Proc. Okla. Acad. Sci., 6: 82-84.
GAEDKE, U. (1993): Ecosystem analysis based on biomass size distributions: a case study of a plankton community in a large lake. - Lim-
nol. Oceanogr., 38: l12-127.
GAJEVSKAJA, N. ( 1927): Zur Kenntnis der Infusorien des Baikalsees. - Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 19: 3 l3-3 I 8.
GAJEVSKAJA, N. (1928): Sur quelques infusoires p6lagiques nouveaux du lac Baikal. - Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR,20:476478 (in
Russian).
GAJEWSKAJA, N. (1933): Zur Oekologie, Morphologie und Systematik der Infusorien des Baikalsees. -Zoologica, Stuttg.,32: 1-298.
GALAL, M. (1992): A study of the ciliated protozoan diversity from Thames River in Runnymade - Berkshire District, England, U.K. -
Proc. zool. Soc. A.R. Egypt,23: 242-247 .
GARCiA, C.M. & NIELL, F.X. (1993): Seasonal change in a saline temporary lake (Fuenta de Piedra, southern Spain). - Hydrobiologia,
267:2ll-223.
GARCIA,M.detMar,LUND,F.&GIL,R.(1981):Theeffectsofbenzoicacidandphenol o'n ParameciumaureliaandFrontonialeucas.-
Int. Congr. Protozool.,6: 108.
GASSOVSKY, G.N. (1960): Change of functions and physiological substitution in the evolution of the free-swimming vorticellae. - Zool.
2h.,39 1423-1424 (in Russian with English summary).
GATES, M.A. (1984): Quantitative importance of ciliate§ in the planktonic biomass of lake ecosystems. - Hydrobiologia, 108: 233-238.
GAUSE, G.F. (1934): Untersuchungen über den Kampf ums Dasein bei Protisten. - Biol. Zbl., 54:536-547.
148

Literatur"e
GAUSE, G. & WITT, A. ( 1934): On the periodic fluctuations in the numbers of animals. A mathematical theory of the relaxation interaction
between predators and prey and its application to a population of protozoa. Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR, l0: l55l l5-59 (in Russian with
English summary).
GEITLER, L. (193'1): Zur Kenntnis der Encystierung des Ciliaten Ophrydium versatile. - Arch. Protistenk.,90: 340-345.
GEITLER, L. (1941): Über die systematische Zugehörigkeit der Zoochlorellen. - Sber. Akad. Wiss. Wien, 156: 357-362.
GEITLER, L. (1968): Auxosporenbildungen bei einigen pennaten Diatomeen und Nit:scltia.flc.toides n. sp. in der Gallerte von Ophrvliunr
wrsotile. - Öst. bot. Z.,ll5: 482490.
GEITLER, L. (197 5): Über die Algenflora der Gallertkolonien des Ciliaten Ophrydiunt ve rsotile . - Arch. Hydrob iol.,7 6: 24-32.
GELEI, G.v. (1939): Neue Silbermethoden im Dienste der Protistenforschung (Komplexsilberverbindungen). Z. wiss. Mikrosk.,56:
l 48- r 80.
GELEI, J.v. (1929): Ein neuer Typ der hypotrichen Infusorien aus der Umgebung von Szeged. SpiroJilunt tisiae n. sp., n. gen., n. täm. -
Arch. Protistenk., 65: I 65-l 82.
GELEI, J.v. (1933): Über den Bau, die Abstammung und die Bedeutung der sog. Tastborsten bei den Ciliaten. - Arch. Protistenk., 80:
I t6-121 .
GELEI, J.v. (1934): Eine mikrotechnische Studie über die Färbung der subpelliculären Elemente der Ciliaten. - Z. wiss. Mikrosk.,5l:
r04-r78.
GELEI, J.v. (1935): Eine neue Abänderung der Klein'schen trockenen Silbermethode und das Silberliniensystem vonGlauconta scintillans.
- Arch. Protistenk., S4: 446455.
GELEI, J. (1944): Különleges planktonikus hypotrichäk az idödszakos vizekben. Adaiok mägyarorszäg csill6s ällatvilägähoz. (XII. köz-
lem6ny.) (Sonderbare planktonische Hypotrichen in den temporären Gewässern. XII. Beitrag zur Ciliatenfauna Ungarns). -Mtrz.Fl6.z.
Kiadja erd. Mriz. Egy., 2 (Uj Folyam): 137-157 (in Hungarian with detailed German summary).
GELEI, J. (1950): Die Lebewesen der Kleingewässer von Fusswegen und Strassen der Stadt Szeged I. Mitteilung. - Acta biol. hung., 1:
I 35-r45.
GELEI, J. (1954): Über die Lebensgemeinschati einiger temporärer Tümpel auf einer Bergwiese im Börzsönygebirge (Oberungarn) III. Cili-
aten. - Acta biol. hung., 5: 259-343.
GELEI, J. & SZABADOS, M. (1950): Tömegprodukcid värosi esövizpocsolyäban (Massenproduktion in einer städtiscen
Regenwasserpfütze). - Annls biol. Univ. szeged., 1: 249-294 (in Hungarian with German translation and Russian summary).
GELEI, J., MECYERI, J., SZABADOS, M. & VARGA, L. ( 1954): Über die Lebensgemeinschaft einiger temporärer Tümpel auf einer Berg-
wiese im Börzsönygebirge (Oberungarn) VIII. Allgemeine Betrachtungen. - Acta biol. hung., 5: 363-384.
GELL6RT, J. (1961): Adatok a Balatoni fen6küled6k csill6sainak ismeret6hez (Angaben zur Kenntnis derZlliaten im Bodensedimente des
Balaton). - Annls Inst. biol. Tihany, 28: 105-108 (in Hungarian with German summary).
GELLERT, J. & TAMÄS, G. (1959): Detritusz-turzäsok kovamoszatainak 6s csilldsainak ökol6giai vizsgälata a Tihanyi-f6lsziget d6li part-
jän (Ökologische Untersuchungen der Kieselalgen und Ciliaten der Detritus-Driften an dem Südufer der Halbinsel Tihany). - Annls Inst.
biol. Tihany, 26:223-235 (in Hungarian with German summary).
GESSNER, F. (1937): Hydrographie und Hydrobiologie der Brackwässer Rügens und des Darß. - Kieler Meeresforsch.,2: l-80.
GIL, R. & PEREZ-SILVA, J. ( 1964): La infraciliacion de Frontonia /czcas EHRENBERG. - Microbiologia esp., 17:239-254.
GILBERT, J.J. (1989): The effect of Daphnia interference on a natural rotifer and ciliate community: short-term bottle experiments. - Lim-
nol. Oceanogr., 34: 606417.
GILBERT, I.J. (1994): Jumping behavior in the oligotrich clliates Strobilidiun t'elox and Halterio grandinella. and its significance as a de-
fense against rotifer predators. - Microb. Ecol., 27: I 89-200.
GILLARD, A. (194'7): Hostatello radiar.s ERLANGER, een nieuwe ciliaat voor de mikrofauna van Belgie. - Biol. Jaarb., 14: 180- I 83.
GILLARD,A.(1950):Contributional'etudedesmicroorganismesde-laLysetdel'EscautaGand. Biol.Jaarb., 17:. 112 16l.
GITTLESON, S.M. & HOOVER, R.L. (1969): Cavemicolous protozoa review of the literature and new studies in Mammoth Cave, Ken-
tucky. - Annls Sp6l6ol., 24:131-116.
GOFF, L.J. & STEIN, J.R. ( l98l ): Digestion in the peritrich ciliate Ophrydium versatile. - Protoplasma, 107:235254.
GOLD, K. & MORALES, E.A. ( 1975): Seasonal changes in lorica sizes and the species of Tintinnida in the New York Bight. - J. Protozool.,
22:520-528.
GONG, X. (1986): The development of eutrophication in Lake Donghu, Wuhan, during the last two decades based on the investigation ol
protozoan changes. Acta hydrobiol. sin., l0: 340 352 (in Chinese with English summary).
GONZALEZ-PALACIOS, E., SALVADO, H. & GRACIA, M.P. (1991): An experimental study on the toxicity of copper to protozoa pre-
sent in activated-sludge. - J. Protozool. Suppl., 38: 274, Abstract I 59.
GOULDER, R. ( 1972): The vertical distribution of some ciliated protozoa in the plankton of a eutrophic pond during summer stratification. -
Freshwat. Biol., 2: 163-176.
GOULDER, R. (1974): Relationships between natural populations of the ciliated protozoa Loxodes magnus STOKES and l. .rtriatrr.r PEN-
ARD. - J. Anim. Ecol., 43:429438.
GOULDER, R. (1975): The effects of photosynthetically raised pH and tight on some ciliated protozoa in a eutrophic pond. - Freshwat.
Biol., 5: 313-322.
GOULDER, R. ( 1976): The tintinnid protozoon Codonella cratero (LEIDY) in two gravel-pit ponds. Arch. Hydrobiol.,77: 403410.
GOULDER, R. ( 1980): The ecology of two species of primitive ciliated protozoa commonly found in standing freshwaters (Lo"todes ntagnus
STOKES and L. striatus PENARD). - Hydrobiologia, T2: l3l-158.
GOURRET, P. & ROESER, P. ( 1888): Contribution ä l'6tude des protozoaires de la Corse. Archs Biol., 8: 139-204.
GRAAF, F.DE (1956): De micro-organismen van plankton, lasion en bodem van het plassengebied het hol. In STICHTING COMMISSIE
VOOR DE VECHT EN HET OOSTELIJK EN WESLIJK PLASSENGEBIED (ed.): De Kortenhoefse Plassen, pp. 67-90. Kortenhoef,
Amsterdam.
749

Literatule
GRABACKA, E. ( 197 I ): Ciliata of the bottom of rearing fishponds in the Golysz complex. - Acta hydrobiol., Krak6w, 13: 5-28.
GRABACKA, E. ( 1973): Protozoans in ponds filled with sugar factory wastes. Acta hydrobiol., Krak6w, 15: 97- I I I .
GRABACKA, E. (1911): The influence of beet sugar factory wastes on the bottom microfauna in fish ponds. - Acta hydrobiol., Krak6w, 19:
313 381.
GRABACKA, E. ( l9tl-5): Ecology of some waters in the forest-a_sricultural basin of the River Brynica r.rear the Upper Silesian industrial re_ei-
on 8. Ciliata in bottom sediments. - Acta hydrobiol., Krak6w, 27:521 533.
GRACIA, M.P. & IGUAL, J. (l9tt7): Los ciliados como organismos saprobios de las aguas. - Misc. Zool., ll: l-l l.
GRACIA, M.DEL P., CASTELLON, C., IGUAL, J. & SUNYER, R. ( 1989): Ciliated protozoan communities in a fluvial ecosystem. Hy-
dlobiologia, 183: I l-31.
GRAHAM, J.M. & CANALE, R.P. ( 1982): Experimental and modeling studies of a fbur-trophic Ievel predator-prey system. - Microb. Ecol.,
8:217-232.
GRAIN, J. ( 1970): Structure et ultrastructure de Lagtnophrw .firsidens KAHL, 192'7 . - Protistologica , 6: 31-51 .
GRAIN, J. (1912): Etude ultrastructtrale d'Hulteria grandinella O. F. M., (Cili6 oli-qotriche) et consid6rations phylogdn6tiques. - Protistolo-
gica,8:. 119-197 .
GRAVE, E. (1982): Didiniunt ndsutum, ein ungewöhnliches Wimpertier. - Mikroksomos, Tl: 306-31l.
GRAY, E. (1943): Some ecological observations upon the infusoria. - J. R. microsc. Soc., 152: 3tl-42.
GREEFF, R. (1888): Land-Protozoen. -Sber. Ges. Beförd. ges. Naturw. Marburg, year 1888:90-158.
GREEN, J. (1960): Crustacea in Lake Ohrid, with special refference to their parasites and epibionts. -Zborn. Rab. hidrobiol. Zav. Ohrid, 8:
I lt.
GREISER, D. (1914): Ökologische Untersuchungen an Ciliaten in einer Modellselbstreinigungsstrecke. Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hy-
drogr.,59:543 555.
GRIEPENBURG,W.(1934):DieProtozoenfäunaeinigerwestfälischerHöhlen.-Sber.Ges.naturf.FreundeBerl.,year1933:18 92.
GRIM, J.N. (1987): The kinetid structures ofthe choreotrichous ciliate Sn-obilidiunt vclo"r and an assessment of its evolutionary lineage. J.
Protozool., 34: I 11-123.
GRIMM, R. (1968): Biologie der gestauten Elbe. Die Auswirkungen der Staustufe Geesthacht auf die benthale Fauna im oberen Grenzbe-
reich des Elbe-Aestuars. - Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl., 3l: 281-378.
GROLIERE, C.-A. (1911): Contribution a l'6tude des cili6s des sphaignes: II. Dynarnique des populations. - Protistologica, 13: 335 352.
GROLIERE. C.-A. (1977a): Contribution a I'etude des cilies des sphai-qnes et des etendues d'eau acides. I - Description de quelques especes
de gymnostomes, hypostomes, hymenostomes et heterotriches. Annls Stn limnol. Besse, 10 (years 197511976):265-296.
GROLIERE, C.-A. (1978): Contribution a l'6tude des cili6s des sphaignes III. Etude math6matique des r€sultats. Protistologica, l4:
295-31 t.
GROLIERE, C.-A. & NJINE, T. (1973): Etude comparte de la dynamique des populations de cili6s clans difl'6rents biotopes d'une mare de
foröt pendant une ann6e. - Protistologica,9: 5-16.
GROOT, A.A.DE & GRAAF, F.DE (1960): Rhizopoda, Heliozoa en Ciliata van het voorste en achterste Choorven en het van Esschenven. -
Publtiös hydrobiol. Vereen., No. 5:'7 4-77.
GUHL, B.E. & FINLAY, B.J. (1993): Anaerobic predatory ciliates track seasonal migrations of planktonic photosynthetic bacteria. - FEMS
Microbiology Letters, 107: 3 l3-3 16.
GUHL, 8.8., FINLAY, B.J. & SCHINK, B. ( 1994): Seasonal development of hypolimnetic ciliate communities in a eutrophic pond. - FEMS
Microbiology Ecology, 14: 293-305.
GUHL, 8.E., FINLAY, B.J. & SCHINK, B. ( I996): Comparison of ciliate communities in the anoxic hypolimnia of three lakes: general l'ea-
tures zrnd the inf'luence of lake characteristics. -J. Plankton Res., l8: 335-353.
GUHL, W. (1985): Revision der Peritrichenfämilie Ophrydiidae. Arch. Protistenk.,l29:121-143.
GUHL, W. (1987): Aquatic ecosystem characterizations by biotic indices. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 72:431455.
GUHL, W. & HAIDER, G. (1988): Urceolariidae (Peritricha). - Protozoenfäuna,7ll:l-LX,221-306,3O9.
GUINEA, A. & FERNANDEZ-GALIANO, D. (1987): Observarions on Opisthonctta herurcgu,ti FAURE-FREMIET: infiaciliature, ar-qyro-
me, and myonemic system. J. Protozool., 34:92-91 .
GUINEA, A.,GIL, R. & FERNANDEZ-GALIANO, D. (1986): Ultrastructure de la fr"ange aboraled'Opistltonetta henncgurr FAUR6-FRE-
MIET, 1906 (Ciliophora Peritrichida). - Acta Protozool.,25: 15-22.
GULATI, A.N. ( I 925 ): An account of some fiesh water ciliates from Lahore. - J. Bombay nat. Hist. Soc., 30: 144 155.
GÜNKEL, N.G. (1997): Aquarien: Ein wenig erforschter Lebensraum für Mikroorganismen. Mikrokosmos, 86:217-224.
GURWITSCH, V. ( 1934): Zur Frtge über die Wirkung der Concentration der Salze auf die Protistenfauna der Wasserbecken. - Acta Univ.
Asiae mediae, Selies 8a. Zoologia, 12: l-24 (in Russian with German summary).
HADA, Y. ( 1937): The fauna of Akkeshi Bay IV. The pelagic ciliata. - J. Fac. Sci. Hokkaido Univ. (Zool.), 5: 143-216.
HADA, Y. (1939): Fresh watertintinnoinea in Japan. -Trans. Sapporo nat. Hist. Soc., 16: 38-44.
HADAS, O. & BERMAN, T. (1998): Seasonal abundance and vertical distribution of protozoa (flagellates, ciliates) and bacteria in Lake
Kinneret, Israel. - Aquat. microb. Ecol., 14: 16l-170.
HADAS, O., PINKAS, R. & WYNNE, D. (1992): Nitrate reductase activity, ammonium regeneration, and orthophospate uptake in protozoa
isolated from Lake Kinneret, Israel. - Microb. Ecol., 23: 107-115.
HAEMPEL, O. (l9ltt): Zur Kenntnis einiger Alpenseen, mit besonderer Berücksichtigung ihrer biologischen und Fischerei-Verhältnisse. -
Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 8:225-306.
HACARGI, S.S. & AMOJI, S.D. ( 1979): Occurrence of Tt'ichodina pcriicalu.r EHRENBERG, 1838 on freshwater carps, Bai'är.r spp. Curr.
Sci..48: 189-190.
HAIDER, G. (1964): Monographie der Familie Urceolariidae (Ciliata, Peritricha, Mobilia) mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der irn süddeut
schen Raum vorkommenden Arten. - Parasit. SchrReihe,17: I-lV, l-251.
150

Literature
HALME, E. (1958): Planktologische Untersuchungen in der Pojo-Bucht und angrenzenden Gewässern IV. Zooplankton. Suomal. eläin- ja
kasvit. Seur. van. eläin Julk., 19: 142.
HAMILTON, L. (1943): An annotated list of the free-living protozoa of Colorado. - Univ. Colo. Stud. phys. biol. Sci., Series D,2:45-53.
HAMMANN, I. (1952): Ökologische und biologische Untersuchungen an Süßwasserperitrichen. - Arch. Hydrobiol.,47: 111-228.
HAMMER, U.T. (1986): Saline lake ecosystems of the world. - Monographiae biol.,59: I 616.
HAN, J. & HAO, S. ( 1995): Investigations on the freshwater protozoa in Hengshui. - Chin. J. Zool., 30: 2-5 (in Chinese).
HANUSKA, L. (1962): Protozoa des Nitra-Flussgebietes (Saprobial-ökologische studie). - Biol6gia, Bratisl., 17: 812-821.
HANUSKA, L. (1964): Zur Typologie des südslowakischen Teiches Trävnica. - Sb. vys. §k. chem-technol.Praze,8: 505-521.
HARA, R. & ASAI, H. (1980): Electrophysiological responses of Didinium nasutunl to Parontecium capture and mechanical stimulation.
Nature,283: 869-870.
HARDOIM, E.L. & HECKMAN, C.W. (1996): The seasonal succession of biotic communities in wetlands of the tropical weland-dry cli-
matic zone: IV. The free-living sarcodines and ciliates of the Pantanal of Mato Grosso, Brazil. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr.,
8l: 367-384.
HARKER, A. ( 1885): On the zoocytium or gelatinous matrix of Ophrydium versatile. - kp. Br. Ass. Advmt Sci., year 1885: 1074-1075.
HARRISON, G.W. (1995): Comparing predator-prey models to Luckinbill's experiment with Didinium and Parametium. - Ecology, 76:
357-374.
HARTWIG, E. (1974): Verzeichnis der im Bereich der deutschen Meeresküste angetroffenen interstitiellen Ciliaten. - Mitt. hamb. zool. Mus.
lnst.,7l: '7 -21.
HARTWIG, E. (1980): The marine interstitial ciliates of Bermuda with notes on their geographical distribution and habitat (l). - Cah. Biol.
mar.,2l:409441.
*
HASLAUER, J. & HAIDER, R. ( I 976): Untersuchung der Gewässergüte des Alterbach- und Glan-Systems im Bereich der Stadt Salzburg.
Ber. Nat.-Med. Ver. Salzburg, 2:27-51.
HASSDENTEUFELOVÄ-MORAVCOVÄ, V. (1955): Protistologick!y pruzkum Novozämeck6ho rybnfka (Protozoological investigations
of the State Nature Reserve ,,Novozämecky rj'bnft"). - Ochrana piirody, l0: 2O9-216.
HATANO, H. & WATANABE, Y. ( 198 I ): Seasonal change of protozoa and micrometazoa in a small pond with leaf litter supply. - Hydro-
biologia. S5: l6l-174.
HAUCK, A. ( 1990): Endocytobiosen 2. Ciliaten als Partner endocytobiotischer Cemeinschaften. - Mikrokosmos ,79: 69J 4.
HAUSMANN, K. & HAUSMANN, E. (l98la): Structural studies on Trit'hodina pedicr.r/z.r (Ciliophora, Peritricha) I. The locomotor fringe
and the oral apparatus. - J. Ultrastruct. Res., 74: 13l-143.
HAUSMANN, K. & HAUSMANN, E. ( 198 I b): Structural studies on Trit'hodina pediculus (Ciliophora, Peritricha) II. The adhesive disc. -
J. Ultrastruct. Res.,74: 144-155.
HAUSMANN, K. & HÜLSMANN, N. (1996): Protozoology. 2nd ed. Georg Thieme Verlag, Stuttgart, New York. I-VIII & 338 pp.
HAUSMANN, K. & OSTWALD, H. (1987): Ein koloniebildendes Wimpertier: Ophrydium versatile. - Mikrokosmos,T6: 129-133.
HAUSMANN, K. & RÜSKENS, A. (1984): Untersuchungen zur Verdauung beim Ciliaten Nassula arlrea EHRENBERG. - Arch.
Protistenk., 128: 7 7 -8'7 .
HAVE, A. (1993): Effects of area and patchiness on species richness: an experimental archipelago of ciliate microcosms. - Oikos, 66:
493.500.
HAVENS, K.E. & BEAVER, J.R. (1997): Consumer vs. resource control of ciliate protozoa in a copepod-dominated subtropical lake. -
Arch. Hydrobiol., 140: 491-5 I L
HAWTHORN, G.R. & ELLIS-EVANS, J.C. (1984): Benthic protozoa from Maritime Antarctic freshwater lakes and pools. - Br. Antarct.
Surv. Bull., No. 62: 67-81.
HECKMAN, C.W. (1974): The seasonal succession of species in a rice paddy in Vientiane, Laos. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 59:
489-507.
HECKMAN, C.W. (1998): The Pantanal of Pocon6. Biota and ecology in the northern section of the world's largest pristine wetland. - Mo-
nographiae biol.,77: I-XXXII + l-622.
HECKMAN, C.W., KAMIETH, H. & STÖHR, M. ( I 990): The usefulness of various numerical methods for assessing the specific effects of
pollution on aquatic biota. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 75:353-377.
HECKY, R.E. & KLING, H.J. ( I 98 I ): The phytoplankton and protozooplankton of the euphotic zone of Lake Tanganyika: species composi-
tion, biomass, chlorophyll content, and spatio-temporal distribution. - Limnol. Oceanogr., 26:548-564.
HEEP, T., ROHOZINSKI, J., SIMPSON, A. & PATTERSON, D.J. (1998): Stentor amethlstinus (Protista: Ciliophora: Heterotrichida), a
common protozoan member of fresh-water plankton in Australia. - Rec. Aust. Mus., 50: 2ll-216.
HELD, R. (1937): Vegetation und Chemismus des Heustadelwassers während derZeit vom Mai 1933 bis Mai 1934. - Biologia gen., 13:
359-390.
HEMPEL, A. (1898): Descriptions ofnew species ofrotifera and protozoa from the Illinois river and adjacent waters. - Bull. Ill. St. Lab. nat.
Hist.,4: 310-317.
HENEBRY, M.S. & CAIRNS, J.Jr. (1980): The effect of source pool maturity on the process of island colonization: an experimental ap-
proach with protozoan communities. - Oikos, 35: 107-l 14.
HENEBRY, M.S. & CAIRNS, J.Jr. ( 1984): Protozoan colonization rates and trophic status of some freshwater wetland lakes. - J. Protozool.,
3l: 456467.
HENEBRY, M.S., CAIRNS, J.Jr., SCHWINTZER, C.R. & YONGUE, W.H.Jr. (1981): A comparison of vascular vegetation and protozoan
communities in some freshwater wetlands of northem lower Michigan. - Hydrobiologia, 83: 353-375.
HERRMANN, S.J. (1977): Analysis and structure of four lentic communities on the Colorado (U.S.A.) shortgrass prairie. - Int. Revue ges.
Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 62: I 29-1 64.
75t

Literature
HEUSS, K. (1976): Untersuchungen zur Bewertung von Verfahren der biologischen Gewässer-Beurteilung. - Schriftenreihe der Landesan-
stalt für Wasser und Abfall des Landes Nordrhein- Westfalen, Heft 36: l-177.
HEUSS, K., KALTHOFF, H. & KLÖS, H. 11972): Basisuntersuchung Schwalm. Limnologisch-wasserwirtschaftliche Untersuchungen an ei-
nem Flachlandfluß unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Wassergüte. - SchrReihe Landesanst. Gewässerkde Gewässerschutz Landes
Nordrhein-Westfalen, Heft 32: l-l 13.
HEWETT, S.W. (1980a): The effect of prey size on the functional and numerical responses of a protozoan predator to its prey. - Ecology,
61:1075*1081.
HEWETT, S.W. (1980b): Prey-dependent cell size in a protozoan predator. - J. Protozool., 27:3ll-313.
HEWETT, S.W. (1987): Prey size and survivorship in Didinium nasutum (Ciliophora: Gymnostomatida). - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 106:
134-t38.
HEWETT,S.W.(1988):PredationbyDidiniumnasutum: effectsof predatorandpreysize.-Ecology,69:135-145.
HILLER, S.A. (1991): Bursellopsis spaniopogon n. spec. (Cilioph.ora: Prostomatida) I. Infraciliature and ultrastructure of the somatic and
oral cortex. - Europ. J. Protistol., 27: 1-16.
HILLER, S.A. (1993): Ultrastructure of Prorodon (Ciliophora, Prostomatida) I. Somatic cortex and some implications conceming kinetid
evolution in prostomatid and colpodid ciliates. - J. Euk. Microbiol.,40: 467486.
HILLER,S.&BARDELE,C.F.(1988): Prorodonaklitolophonn.spec.andthe"dorsalbrush"asacharactertoidentifycertainsubgroupsin
the genus Prorodon. - Arch. Protistenk., 136: 213-236.
HILLIARD, D.K. (1968): Tintinnidium ephemeridum n. sp. A new freshwater tintinnid from Alaska with notes on the algae attached to its
test. - Hydrobiologia, 31: 385-401.
HOFKER, J. (1922): De Protozoön. In REDEKE, H.C. (ed.): Flora en fauna der Zuiderzee. Monografie van een Brakwatergebied, pp.
127-183. De Boer Jr. Te Helder.
HOLLOWDAY, E.D. (1975): Some notes on an uncommon colonial peritrichous protozoon. Ophryiium t,ersatile (O. F. M.). - Microscopy,
32: 503-5 1 1.
HOLLOWDAY, E.D. (19'19): The capture and ingestion of the plankton rotifer Asplanchna priodonta. GOSSE. by the holotrichous ciliate
Trachelius. - Microscopy,33: 535 538.
HOLT, P.A. & CORLISS, J.O. (1973): Pattem variability in microtubular arrays associated with the tentacles of At'tinobolina (Ciliatea:
Gymnostomatida). - J. Cell Biol., 58: 213-219.
HOLT, P.A., LYNN, D.H. & CORLISS, J.O. ( 1973): An ultrastructural study of the tentacle-bearing clliate Actinobolino smalli n. sp. and its
systematic and phylogenetic implications. - Protistologica ,9: 521-541.
HOLYOAK, M. & LAWLER, S.P. (1996): Persistence of an extinction-prone predator-prey interaction through metapopulation dynamics. -
Ecology, 77 : 186l - 187 9.
HONIGMANN, H. (1909): Beiträge zur Kenntnis des Süßwasserplanktons. - Abh. Ber. Mus. Nat.- u. Heimatk. (Naturk. Vorgesch.) Magde-
btrg,2: 49-87 .
HOOD, C.L. (1927):The zoöchlorella of Frontonia leuc'os.-Biol. Bull. mar. biol. Lab., Woods Hole, 52:19-88.
HORVÄTH, J.v. (1933): Beiträge zur hypotrichen Fauna der Umgebung von Szeged. I. - Arch. Protistenk., 80: 281-302.
HORVÄTH, J.v. (1938): Eine neue Silbermethode für die Darstellung der erregungsleitenden Elemente der Ciliaten. - Z. wiss. Mikrosk.,55:
tt3-122.
HOVASSE, R. (1932): Trois infusoires planktoniques du Bosphore. Archs Zool. exp. g6n.,73 (Notes et Revue): l-8.
HUBER, G. & NIPKOW, F. (1927): Beobachtungen am Plankton des Zürichsees. Dileptus trachelioides ZACHARIAS, ein für den Zürich-
see neues Planktoninfusorium. - Vjschr. naturf. Ges. Zürich,72: 312-325.
HUBER-PESTALOZZI, G. (1945): Neue Planktonorganismen im Zürichsee. Paradileptus c'onicus WENRICH tnd Paradileptus ovalis nova
spec. (3. Mitteilung). - Vjschr. naturf. Ges. Zirich, 90: 120 I 26.
HUL, M. (1986): Ciliata in bacterial and fungal communities in the River tr-yna (North-Eastem Poland). - Acta hydrobiol., Krak6w, 28:
149 t64.
HUL, M. (1987): Formation of the structure of ciliata seston communities in the River Lyna (Northern Poland). - Acta hydrobiol., Krakdw,
29:203-218.
HUMPESCH, U.H. & MOOG, O. (1994): Flora und Fauna der österreichischen Donau. - Limnologie aktuell, 2: 8l-107.
HUNT, G.W. & CHEIN, S.M. (1983): Seasonal distribution, composition and abundance of the planktonic ciliata and testacea of Cayuga La-
ke. - Hydrobiolo gia, 98: 257 -266.
HUTTENLAUCH, I.T. (1986): Morphologie und Morphogenese des Cortex von Coleps amphacanthus. Ein Beitrag zur Diskussion der sy-
stematischen Stellung der Gattung Coleps (Crliophora). Dissertation Universität Tübingen. 135 pp.
HWANG, S.-J. & HEATH, R.T. ( 1997): The distribution of protozoa across a trophic gradient, factors controlling their abundance and im-
portanceintheplanktonfoodweb.-J.PlanktonRes., 19:491-518. ILOWAISKY,S.A.(1921):ZweineueArtenundGattungenvon
Infusorien aus dem Wolgabassin. - Rab. volzh. biol. Sta., 6:97-105 (in Russian with detailed German summary).
ICZN (The International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature) (1985): Intemational code ofzoological nomenclature. Third edition ad-
opted by the XX general assembly ofthe international union ofbiological sciences. University ofCalifornia Press, Berkeley, Los Ange-
les. XX + 338 pp.
ILOWAISKY, S.A. (1921): Zwei nete Arten und Gattungen von Infusorien aus dem Wolgabassin. - Rab. volzh. biol. Sta., 6: 97-105 (in
Russian with detailed German summary).
IMAI, S., MIYAZAKI, H. & NOMURA, K. (1991): Trichodinid species from the gilt of culturedJapanese eel,Anguilla japonica,withthe
description of a new species based on light and scanning electron microscopy. - Europ. J. Protistol., 27:79-84.
IMHOF, O.E. ( 1883): Studien zur Kenntnis der pelagischen Fauna der Schweizerseen. (Vorläufige Mittheilung.). - Zool. Anz.,6: 46641l.
IMHOF, O.E. (1884): Resultate meiner Studien über die pelagische Fauna kleinerer und größeret Süßwasserbecken der Schweiz. - Z. wiss.
Zool..40: 154-178.
152

Literature
IMHOF, O.E. (1885): Notiz bezüglich der Difilugia crateraLEIDY. -Zool. Anz.,8:293)94.
IMHOF, O.E. (1886): Über microscopische pelagische Thiere aus den Lagunen von Venedig. -Zool. Anz.,9: 101-104.
IMHOF, O.E. (1892): Die Zusammensetzung der pelagischen Fauna der Süßwasserbecken. Nach dem gegenwärtigen Stande der Untersu-
chungen. - Biol. Zbt., L2: 111-182,200-205.
ISSEL, R. (1901): Saggio sulla fauna termale italiana. - Atti Accad. Sci., Torino, 36 (years l9oOl190l):53-74.
IZQUIERDO, V. (1906): Ensayo sobre los protozoos de las aguas dulces de Chile. Imprenta Cervantes, Santiago de Chile. 228 pp.
JACK, J.D. & GILBERT, J.J. (1993a): The effect of suspended clay on ciliate population growth rates. - Freshwat. Biol., 29: 385-394.
JACK, J.D. & GILBERT, J.J. (1993b): Susceptibilities of different-sized ciliates to direct suppression by small and large cladocerans. -
Freshwat. Biol., 29 l9)9.
JACK, J.D., WICKHAM, S.A., TOALSON, S. & GILBERT, J.J. (1993): The effect of clays on a freshwater plankton community: an enclo-
sure experiment. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 127:257-270.
JACKSON, K.M. & BERGER, J. (1984): Survival of ciliate protozoa under starvation conditions and at low bacterial levels. - Microb.
Ecol., 10: 47-59.
JACKSON, K.M. & BERGER, J. (1985a): Survivorship curves of ciliate protozoa under starvation conditions and at low bacterial levels. -
Protistologica. 2l : 1l -24.
JACKSON, K.M. & BERGER, J. (1985b): Life history attributes of some ciliated protozoa. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 104: 52-63.
JACOBSON, I. (1928): Beiträge zur Protozoenkunde von Eesti. - Protok. Obshch. Estest., Yur'ev, 35: 80-1 12.
JACOBSON, I. (1931): Fibrilläre Differenzierungen bei Ciliaten. - Arch. Protistenk., 75: 31*100.
JACZ1,I. (1940): Die Süsswasser-Tintinniden Ungams. - Fragm. faun. hung., 3: 59-60.
JACZ6,I. & MANN, H. (1940): Hydrobiologische Untersuchungen am Belsö-Td in Tihany im Jahr 1938-39. - Arb. ung. biol. Forschlnst.,
12:170-203.
JAECKEL, S.G.A. (t962): Die Tierwelt der Schlei. Übersicht einer Brackwasserfauna. - Schr. naturw. Ver. Schlesw.-Holst., 33 1l-32.
JAHN, T.L. & HENDRIX, E.M. (1969): Locomotion of the telotroch ciliate Opisthonecta henneguyi. - Revta Soc. mex. Hist. nat.,30:
103-131.
JAKOBSEN, H.H. & MONTAGNES, D.J.S. (1999): A redescription of Balanion comatum Wulff, 1919 (Prorodontida, Ciliophora), with
notes on its cultivation and behaviour. - J. Euk. Microbiol., 46: 198-205.
JAMES, M.R., BURNS, C.W. & FORSYTH, D.J. (1995): Pelagic ciliated protozoa in two monomictic, southem temperate lakes of contra-
sting trophic state: seasonal distribution and abundance. - J. Plankton Res., 17: 1479-1500.
I
JAMES-CLARK, H. (1866): The anatomy and physiology of the vorticellidan parasite (Trichodina pediczlas, EHR.) of Hydra. - Mem. Bo-
ston Soc. nat. Hist., l: I l4-130.
JANKOWSKI, A.W. (1967): New genera and subgenera of classes Gymnostomea and Ciliostomea. In ACADEMY OF SCIENCE OF MOL-
DAVIAN SSR (ed.): Materials of the V Conference of Young Scientists of Moldavia, p. 36. Kishinev.
JANKOWSKI, A.W. ( 1975): A conspectus of the new system of subphylum Ciliophora DOFLEIN, 1901. - Akad. Nauk SSSR, Zool. Inst.
Leningrad, year 1975: 26-27 (in Russian).
JANKOWSKI, A.W. (1976): Revision of a system of cyrtophorines. In NAUKOVA DUMKA (ed.): Materials of the II All-Union Confe-
renceofProtozoologists.PartLGeneralprotozoology,pp.167-l63.NaukovaDumka,Kiev.
JANKOWSKI, A.W. (1978): Revision of a system of class Polyhy-menophora (Spirotricha). - Tezisy Dokl. zool. Inst. Akad. Nauk SSSR,
1978: 3940 (in Russian).
JANKOWSKI, A.W. (1979): Revision of the order Hypotrichida STEIN, 1859. Generic catalogue, phylogeny, taxonomy. - Trudy zool.
Inst., Leningr.,86: 48-85 (in Russian with English summary).
JANKOWSKI, A.W. (1980): Conspectus of a new system of the phylum Ciliophora. - Trudy zool. Inst., Leningr., 94: 103-121 (in Russian).
JANKOWSKI, A.W. (1985): Life cycles and taxonomy of generic grorrys Scyphidia, Heteropolaila, Zoothamnium and Cothurnia (Class Pe-
ritricha). - Trudy zool. Inst., Leningr., 129:74-100 (in Russian).
JARNEFELT, H. (1934a): Zur Limnologie einiger Gewässer Finnlands X. - Suomal. eläin- ja kasvit. Seur. van. Julk., 14: l-44.
JARNEFELT, H. (1934b). Zur Limnologie einiger Gewässer Finnlands XI. Petsamo. - Suomal. eläin- ja kasvit. Seur. van. Julk., 14:
172-347.
JAROCKI, J. & JAKUBOWSKA, W. (1927): E,ine neue, solitär freischwimmende Peritriche, Hastatella aesculacantha n. sp. - Zool. Anz.,
73:27Ga280.
JAROSHENKO, M.F. & CHORIK, F.P. (1969): Ecology of fresh-water free-living ciliates. - Progress in Protozoology, 3: 195-196 (Ab-
stract).
JERSABEK, C.D. & SCHABETSBERGER, R. (1996): Limnological aspects of an alpine karst lake with extreme changes in water level. -
Limnologica (Berlin), 26: l-13.
JiRovEC, o., WENIG, K., FoTT, B., BARToS, E., WEISER, J. & SRÄMEK-HUSEK, R. (t953): prorozoologie. Nakladatelsrvi Ces-
koslovensk6 Akademie Vöd, Praha. 643 pp. (in Czech).
JONES, E.E. (1974): The protozoa of Mobile Bay, Alabama. * Univ. South Alabama Monogr., l: l-l 13.
JONES, R.I. ( 1994): Mixotrophy in planktonic protists as a spectrum of nutritional strategies. - Marine Microbial Food Webs, 8: 87-96.
JÜRGENS, K., ARNDT, H. & ROTHHAUPT, K.O. (1994): Zooplankton-mediated changes of bacterial community structure. - Microb.
Ecol.,27:274L
JÜRGENS, K., GASOL, J.M., MASSANA, R. & PEDRÖS-ALIo,C. (1994a): Control of heterotrophic bacteria and prorozoansby Daphnia
pulex in the epilimnion of Lake Cis<i. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 131: 55-78.
JÜRGENS, K., SKIBBE, O. & JEPPESEN, E. (1999): Impacr of merazooplankron on the composition and population dynamics of plank-
tonic ciliates in a shallow, hypertrophic lake. - Aquat. Microb. Ecol., in press.
JUSTVN, J. (1960): Die Verunreinigung des Libu§-Baches und eine experimentelle Untersuchuirg der Selbstreinigungsprozesse seines Was-
sers. - Acta Univ. Carol., Biologica, 1960: 199-239.
153

Literature
JUTRCZENKI,J.v.(1982):ÖkologischeUntersuchungderCiliatenfaunazweierBonnerWaldbäche.-Decheniana,l35:104-116.
KAHL, A. (1926): Neue und wenig bekannte Formen der holotrichen und heterotrichen Ciliaten. - Arch. Protistenk.,55: 197-438.
KAHL, A. (1927): Neue und ergänzende Beobachtungen heterotricher Ciliaten. - Arch. Protistenk.,5T: l2l-203.
KAHL, A. (192'7a): Neue und ergänzende Beobachtungen holotricher Ciliaten. I. - Arch. Protistenk., 60:34-129.
KAHL, A. (1928): Die Infusorien (Ciliata) der Oldesloer Salzwasserstellen. - Arch. Hydrobiol.,19: 189-246.
KAHL, A. (1928a): Die Infusorien (Ciliata) der Oldesloer Salzwasserstellen. Arch. Hydrobiol., 19: 50-123.
KAHL, A. (1930): Urtiere oder Protozoa I: Wimpertiere oder Ciliata (Infusoria) l. Allgemeiner Teil und Prostomata. - Tierwelt Dtl., 18:
1-l 80.
KAHL, A. ( 1930a): Neue und ergänzende Beobachtungen holotricher Infusorien. II. - Arch. Protistenk., 10: 313416.
KAHL, A. (1931): Urtiere oder Protozoa I: Wimpertiere oder Ciliata (Infusoria) 2. Holotricha außer den im L Teil behandelten Prostomata.
- Tierwelt Dtl,., 2l l8 1-398.
KAHL, A. (1931a): Über die verwandtschaftlichen Beziehungen der Suctorien zu den prostomen Infusorien. - Arch. Protistenk., T3:
423481.
KAHL, A. (1932): Urtiere oder Protozoa I: Wimpertiere oder Ciliata (Infusoria) 3. Spirotricha. - Tierwelt Dtl.,25:399-650.
KAHL, A. (1933): Ciliata libera et ectocommensalia. - Tierwelt N.- u. Ostsee, Lieferung 23 (Teil II. ct):29-146.
KAHL, A. (1933a): Suctoria. - Tierwelt N.- u. Ostsee, Lieferung 23 (Teil II.c:): 184-226.
KAHL, A. ( 1935): Urtiere oder Protozoa I: Wimpertiere oder Ciliata (Infusoria) 4. Peritricha und Chonotricha. - Tierwelt Dtl., 30: 65 l-886.
KALBE, L. (1963): Ein Beitrag zur benthischen und planktischen Besiedelung der Oberwarnow und ihrer Nebengewässer - Artenliste. -
Wiss. Z. Univ. Rostock Reihe Mathematik und Naturwissenschaften, L2:723-'729.
KALMUS, H. (1928): Über die Bodenfauna der Moldau im Gebiete von Prag. Ein Jahreszyklus. II. Protozoa, Hydrozoa, Crustacea, Tardi-
grada, Hydracarina. Mit einem Anhang: Ökologische Beobachtungen und Versuche. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 19:
349429.
KALTENBACH, A. (1960): Ökologische Untersuchungen an Donauciliaten. - Wass. Abwass. Wien, year 1960: l5l-l']-4.
KALTENBACH, A. ( 1962): Nahrungsauswahl und Nahrungsaufnahme holotricher Ziliaten der Donaulitoralzone tnd, im Myriophyllunt-Auf-
wuchs des Donaualtwassers Gänsehäufel. - Wass. Abwass. Wien, year 1962: 157-187
KAPLIN,V.M.(1969):Ecologyofpelagicciliatesof theBaikalLake.-ProgressinProtozoology,3:197(Abstract).
KARPOV, 4.S., GOODKOV, A.V. & MARINICH, M.A. (1991): The variety of algae-bearing invertebrates from inner lakes of the Valamo
Island. - Zool. 2h.,70:5-l I (in Russian with English summary).
KAUFMANN, J. (1958): Chemische und biologische Untersuchungen an den Abwasserfischteichen von München. -2. angew.Zool.,45:
433481.
KAZUBSKI, S.L. ( 1967): Study on the growth of skeletal elements inTrichodina pedlcr.r/as EHRBG. - Acta Protozool., 5: 37-48.
KAZUBSKI, S.L. ( 199 I a): Morphological variation of the ciliate Trichodina pedicalas EHRENBERG, I 838. I. Parasitizing on hydras. - Ac-
ta Protozool.. 30: 169-115.
KAZUBSKI, S.L. (l99lb): Morphological variation of the ciliate Trichodina pedicula.r EHRENBERG, 1838. IL Parasitizing on tadpoles. -
Acta Protozool., 30: 1'77-186.
KAZUBSKI, S.L. (1991c): Morphological variation of the ciliate Trichodina pediculus EHRENBERG, 1838. IlL Parasitizing on crucian
carp (Carassius carassius (L.)) from small ponds in Kortowo (Otsztyn). - Acta Protozool.,30: 187-192.
KAZUBSKI, S.L. & MIGALA, K. ( 1968): Urceolariidae from breeding carp - Cyprinus c'arpio L. in Zabieniec and remarks on the seasonal
variability of trichodinids. - Acta Protozool., 6: 137 160.
KEISER, A. (1921): Die sessilen peritrichen Infusorien und Suctorien von Basel und Umgebung. - Revue suisse Zool., 28:221-341.
KELLER, W., YAN, N.D., HOWELL, T., MOLOT, L.A. & TAYLOR, W.D. (1992): Changes in zooplankton during the experimental neu-
tralizationandearlyreacidificationof BowlandLakenearSudbury,Ontario.-Can.J.Fish.aquat.Sci.,49(Suppl. l):52-62.
KELLICOTT, D.S. ( 1884): Observations on infusoria, with descriptions of new species. - Proceedings of the American Society of Microsco-
pists,6: I 10 124.
KELLICOTT, D.S. (1885): Observations on some fresh-water infusoria. With descriptions of a few species regarded as new. - Proc. Am.
Soc. Microscopists,8: 38 47.
KELLICOTT, D.S. (1887): Notice of some fresh-water infusoria, with remarks on collecting and preserving these delicate animals. - The
Microscope, 7 : 225-233.
KENT, E.B. (1985): Spatial pattem on a colonized surface and prey capture rates ofa sessile predator: Tokophrya lemnarum (Ciliata: Sucto-
rida). - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 104: 134-144.
KENT, W.S. (1880-1882): A manual of the infusoria: including a description of all known flagellate, ciliate, and tentaculiferous protozoa,
British and foreign, and an account ofthe organization and affinities ofthe sponges. Volumes I-lll. David Bogue, London. 913 pp. (Vol.
I 1880: l-432; Vol. II 1881: 433 720,1882:l2l-913; Vol. III 1882: Plates).
KENTER, U., ZIMMERMANN, U. & MÜLLER, H. (1996): Grazing rates of the freshwater ciliate Balanion plant'tonit'unt determined by
flow cytometry. - J. Plankton Res., 18: 1041 1053.
KEPR, T. (1991): Parasitic protozoa of cyprinid fishes: protozoa of the roach Rutilus rutilus (LINNAEUS, 1758) in Czechoslovakia. - Folia
parasitologica. 38: I l-21.
KERR, S.J. (1983): Colonization of blue-green algae by Vorticella (Ciliata: Peritrichida). -Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 102: 38-47.
KIRBY, H. (1950): Materials and methods in the study of protozoa. Univ. Calif. Press, Berkeley.
KIVI, K. ( i 986): Annual succession of pelagic protozoans and rotifers in the Tvärminne Storfjärden, SW coast of Finland. Ophelia, Suppl.,
4: l0l-l 10.
KIVI, K. & SETALA, O. (1995): Simultaneous measurement of food particle selection and clearance rates of planktonic oligotrich ciliates
(Ciliophora: Oligotrichina). - Mar. Eco[. Prog. Ser., ll9: 125-131.
754

Literature
KLAVENESS, D. (1984): Studies on the morphology, fbod selection and growth of two planktonic freshwater strains of Colcps sp. - Proti-
stologica, 20: 335-349.
KLEKOWSKI, R.Z. (1981): Size dependence of metabolism in protozoans. Verh. int. Verein. theor. angew. Limnol., 2l: 1498 1502.
KLIMOWICZ, H. (1970): Microfauna of activated sludge Part L Assemblage of microfauna in laboratory models of activated sludge. - Acta
hydrobiol., Krak6w, 12: 351 -31 6.
KLIMOWICZ, H. (1972): The microfäuna of activated sludge Part II. Assemblages of microfauna in block aeration tanks. - Acta hydrobiol.,
Krak6w. 14: 19-36.
KLIMOWICZ, H. (1973): Microfauna of activated sludge Part III. The effect of physico-chemical fäctors on the occurrence of microfäuna in
the annual cycle. -Actahydrobiol., Krak6w, 15: 167-188.
KLIMOWICZ, H. (1979): Estimation of water usability of the dam reservoir Zegrzyhski on the Rivers Bug and Narew for waterworks based
on plankton investigations. - Acta hydrobiol., Krak6w, 2l:31-52.
KLIMOWICZ, H. ( 198 1): The plankton of the River Vistula in the region of Warsaw in the years 1977-1919. - Acta hydrobiol., Krak6w,
23:41 67.
KOFOID, C.A. (1896): A report upon the protozoa observed in Lake Michigan and the inland lakes in the neighborhood of Charlevoix, du-
ring the summer of I 894. - Bulletin. Michigan Fish Commission, 6:16 84.
KOFOID, C.A. & CAMPBELL, A.S. (1929): A conspectus of the marine and fieshwater ciliata belonging to the suborder Tintinnoinea, with
descriptions of new species principally from the Agassiz expedition to the Eastern Tropical Pacific 1904-1905. - Univ. Calif. Publs
Zool..34:1403.
KOFOID, C.A. & ROSENBERG, L.E. ( 1940): The neuromotor system of Opisthonetta he nneguyi (FAUR6,-FREMIET). Proc. Am. phil.
Soc.,82: 421436.
KOMALA, Z. (1996): Remarks on the Paramet'ium aurelia species complex and other zooplankton in the region of Szczawnica. - Folia
biol., Krak6w, 44: 35-39.
KOMALA, Z. & PRZYBOS, E. ( 1994): Paranrct'ium n'iauralia and other species of the aurelia complex in the Kaczawskie Mts and Plateau
(Western Sudeten). - Folia biol., Krak6w, 42:27-33.
KOMALA, Z. & PRZYBOS, E. ( 1995): Contemporary investigations on the Parametium aurclio species complex in the region of Krak6w.
- Folia biol., Krak6w, 43: 15-19.
KORNIYENKO, G.S. (1970): The role of protozoa in pond plankton. - Hydrobiol. J.,6:21-32.
KORNIYENKO, G.S. (1972): Protozoa in plankton of natural waterof the Kuban'region. - Hydrobiol. J.,8: l0-18.
KOSOVA, A.A. (1965): Zooplankton of the western part of the lowlands in the Volga delta in the period of the regulation of its course. -
All-Union Hydrobiol. Soc., 1965: 98-137 (in Russian).
KOSTENKO, S.M., PALIENKO, L.P. & ORCHARENKO, N.A. (1984): On the protist fauna of Cyclopoida in water bodies in the region of
Kiev. - Vestnik Zoologli, year 1984: 61 (in Russian).
KOVAL'CHUK, A.A. (1982): Some data on the fauna and ecology of Metopidae (lnfusoria) in Kiev Reservoir. - Hydrobiol. J., 16 (year'
1980): 38-44.
KOVALCHUK, A.A. (1997): Cilioperiphyton of the River Tisa (in Ukraine). - Proceedings of the International Scientif.ic-Practical Conf'e-
rence (Ukraine, Rakhiv), 1997:94 98.
KOVALCHUK, A.A. (1997a): Cilioplankton of the River Tisa (in Ukraine;. Proceedings of the L.rternatior.ral Regional Seminar Environ-
ment Protection: Modern Studies in Ecology and Microbiology,l:441446.
KOVALCHUK,A.A.&BABKO,R.V.(1989):AnewspeciesofplanktonicinfusoriafiomtheDnieperBasin.-Zool.Zh.,68:126 l2l(in
Russian with English summary).
KOVALCHUK, A.A. & SKORIK, L.V. (1988): Consumption of the primary production of phytomicrobenthos and destruction olorganic
substances by the free-living ciliates in benthos of the Tsibulnik Bay of the Kremenchug reservoir. Acta hydrochim. hydrobiol., l6:
165-l 7 t.
KOVALCHUK, A.A. & SVINTSOVA, J.V. (1994): The structure andfunction of cryophyllic cylioplankton communities. l. Dynamics of
species composition, quantity and biomass of infusoria. - Gidrobiol. Zh.,30:24-31 (in Russian with English summary).
KRAINER, K.-H. (1988): Alpha-Taxonomie und Ökologie neuer sowie mehrerer wenig bekannter pelagischer Ciliaten (Protozoa: Ciliopho-
ra aus den Klassen Kinetofragminophora, Oligohymenophora, Polyhymenophora) einiger Grundwasserbaggerteiche des nördlichen
Leibnitzer Feldes (Steiermark, Österreich.1. Dissertation Universität Graz. l-lll, l-209, I-XLI.
KRAINER, K.-H. (1991): Contributions to the morphology, infiaciliature and ecology of the planktonic ciliates Stronbidiunt pelagitunt n.
sp., Pelagosn'onthidiunt ntirahile (PENARD, l9l6) n. g., n. comb., and Pelagostronbidiunt .falla: (ZACHARIAS, I 896) n. g., n. comb.
(Ciliophora, Oligotrichida). - Europ. J. Protistol., 27:60J0.
KRAINER, K.-H. (1993): Taxonomic and quantitative aspects of some planktonic strombidiids (Ciliophora: Oligotrichida) fiom dredgered
groundwater ponds. Int. Congr. Protozool., 9: 68, Abstract 262.
KRAINER, K.-H. (1995): Taxonomische Untersuchungen an neuen und wenig bekannten planktischen Ciliaten (Protozoa: Ciliophora) aus
Baggerseen in Österreich. Lauterbornia, 2l:39 68.
KRAINER, K.-H. & FOISSNER, W. ( 1990): Revision of the genus A^rA enasia BLOCHMANN, 1895, with proposal of two new species, and
description of Rhabdooskenasia ntininn n. g., n. sp. (Ciliophora, Cyclotrichida). - J. Protozool., 37:414-421.
KRAINER, K.-H. & MÜLLER, H. (1995): Morphology, infraciliature and ecology of a new planktonic ciliate, Hisriobalantium bodamitunt
n. sp. (Scuticociliatida: Histiobalantiidae). - Europ. J. Protistol., 31: 389-395.
KRAMER, H. (1964): Ökologische Untersuchungen an temporären Tümpeln des Bonner Kottenforstes. Decheniana, ll7:53-132.
KRAVCHENKO, V.M. (1969): On fauna of infusoria in the reservoirs of the Seversky Donets Basin. - V6st. zoologii. Institut Zoologii Aka-
demia Nauk Ukrainskoi SSR, year 1969 (3):69-75 (rn Russian with English summary).
KREPUSKA, G. (1917): Budapest v6gl6nyei (Die Protisten von Budapest). - Allatt. Kö21., 16: 86-1 16, 154-184,222 (in Hungalian with
German summary).
755

Literature
KREPUSKA, G. (1930): Kieg6szitö adatok Budapestv6gl6nyfaun6jähoz (Ergänzende Angaben zur Protistenfauna von Budapest). - Annls
hist.-nat. Mus. natn. hung.,27: 2V31 (in Hungarian and German).
KRIEG, H.-J. & RIEDEL-LORJE, J.-C. (1991): Randbedingungen beim Einsatz von Aufwuchs-Untersuchungen zur Gewässergütebewer-
tung. - Gas- u. WassFach (Wasser/Abwasser), 132:20-24.
KRISHNAMOORTHI, K.P. & SARKAR, R. (1981): Ecology of free swimming ciliates from stabilization ponds, Nagpur[ndia/. - Int.
Congr. Protozool.. 6: 198.
KRÜGER, F. ( 1936): Die Trichocysten der Ciliaten im Dunkelfeldbild. -Zoologica, Stuttg., 34 (Heft 91): l-83.
KRZYZANEK, E. & KRZYZANEK, M. ( 1986): Development and structure of the Goczatrkowice reservoir ecosystem XVIII. List of plant
and animal species. - Ekol. pol., 34: 559-5'77.
KUCKLENTZ, V. & METZNER, G. (1980): Untersuchungen am Speichersee. - Münchn. Beitr. Abwass.- Fisch.- Flussbiol.,32:61-84.
KURASCHOVA, E.K. (1967): Bestand und saisonale Variationen des Zooplankton im Wolgadelta. - Trudy Kasp. nauchno-issled. Inst. Ryb.
Choz., 23:. 59-7 9 (in Russian).
KUSANO, H. (1985): List of microphagotrophs and their food habits in Mizutori-no-numa pond. - Rep. Inst. nat. Stu., 16:99-112.
KUSANO, H., KUSANO, T. & WATANABE, Y. (1987): Seasonal succession of a microphagotroph community in a small pond during lit-
ter decomposition. - Microb. Ecol., 14: 55-66.
KUSEL-FETZMANN, E. (1972): Die Algenvegetation im Klopeiner See. - Carinthia ll,162182:240-245.
KUSTOVLYANKINA, N.B. (1990): Protozoan plankton. In KAUFMAN, Z.S. (ed.): The Lake Onega ecosystem and trends in its transfor-
mation, pp. 192-207 . Nauka, Leningrad.
KUTIKOWA, L.A. (1984): Fauna of activated sludge (Atlas). Akademie Nauka, Leningrad. 263 pp. (in Russian).
KUTKUHN, J.H. (1958): Notes on the precision of numerical and volumetric plancton estimates from small-sample concentrates. - Limnol.
Oceanogr., 3: 69-83.
KUTTNER, O. (1923): Beiträge zur Kenntnis der Uferfauna des Bodensees. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 14: 116-124.
KUZNETSOVA, M.A. & ARSLANOVA, T.P. (1981): Estimation of the production of planktonic infusorians in connection with fluctua-
tions in their abundance. - Hydrobiol. J., 16: 15-21.
KWIATKOWSKA-GRABACKA, E. (1964): Infusoria appearing on the mowed plants in ponds. - Acta hydrobiol., Krak6w, 6: l-l L
KWIATKOWSKA-GRABACKA, E. (1965): Microfauna of the bottom of fish ponds in Golysz. - Acta hydrobiol., Krak6w, 7:317-328.
LACKEY, J.B. ( 1938a): A study of some ecologic factors affecting the distribution of protozoa. - Ecol. Monogr.,8: 501-527 .
LACKEY, J.B. (1938b): Protozoan plankton as indicators of pollution in a flowing stream. - Publ. Hlth Rep., Wash., 53: 2037-2058.
LACKEY, J.B. (1940): The microscopic flora and fauna of tree holes. - Ohio J. Sci., 40: 186-192.
LACKEY, J.B. (1942): The plankton algae and protozoa of two Tennessee Rivers. - Am. Midl. Nat., 27: l9l-202.
LACKEY, J.B. (1961): Bottom sampling andenvironmental niches. -Limnol. Oceanogr., 6:271-219.
LACKEY, J.B. & LACKEY, E.W. ( 1963): Microscopic algae and protozoa in the waters near Plymouth in August 1962. - l. mar. biol. Ass.
U. K.,43: 797-805.
LACKEY, J.B. & LACKEY, E.W. (1970): A late summer checklist of the marine microbiota around Logy Bay, Newfoundland. - Can. J.
Zool., 48:789-:795.
LAKOWITZ (1901): Die winterliche Mikrofauna und Mikroflora des Klostersees bei Karthaus Wpr. - Schr. naturf. Ges. Danzig,l0:2125.
LAMOUROUX, J.-V.-F., BORY DE SAINT-VINCENT, J.B & DESLONGCHAMPS, E. (1824): Encyclop6die m6thodique. Histoire natu-
relle des zoophytes, ou animaux rayonn6s, faisant suite a l'histoire naturelle des vers de bruguiöre. Agasse, Paris. 819 pp.
LARSEN, H.F. ( 1975): Färbung von Protozoen mit Azur A. - Mikrokosmos,64:264-265.
LARSEN, H.F. (1992): Süßwasserciliaten aus Grönland. Blepharisma,Tetrahymena und andere Arten. - Mikrokosmos, Sl: 291-302.
LAUTERBORN, R. (1894): Ueber die Winterfauna einiger Gewässer der Oberrheinebene. Mit Beschreibungen neuer Protozoön. - Biol.
Zb|, 14: 390-398.
LAUTERBORN, R. ( 1908): Protozoen-Studien. V. Teil. Zur Kenntnis einiger Rhizopoden und Infusorien aus dem Gebiete des Oberrheins. -
Z. w iss. Zoo1., 90: 645-669.
LAUTERBORN, R. (1916): Die sapropelische Lebewelt. Ein Beitrag zur Biologie des Faulschlammes natürlicher Gewässer. - Verh.
naturh.-med. Ver. Heidelb. (N. S.), 13 (years 1914-1911):395- 481.
LAVRENTYEV, P.Y. (1989): The community of planktonic infusorians of subarctic tundra lakes. Their structure, role in the ecosystem and
reaction to human activity. - Gos. Nauchno-Issled Inst. Ozern. Rechn. Rybn. Khoz. Sb. Nauchn. Tr.,292: ll0-121 (in Russian).
LAVRENTYEV, P.J. (1994): Anthropogenic stress in ciliate communities: a short-term study on arctic tundra lakes. - Arch. Hydrobiol.
Beih. Ergebn. Limnol., 40: 149 153.
LAVRENTYEV, P.J., GARDNER, W.S., CAVALETTO, J.F. & BEAVER, J.R. (1995): Effects of the Zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha
PALLAS) on protozoa and phytoplankton from Saginaw Bay, Lake Huron. - J. Great Lakes Res., 21: 545-551.
LAYBOURN, l. (1977): Respiratory energy losses in the protozoan predator Didinium nasutum MÜLLER iCiliophora). - Oecologia
(Berlin), 27:305-309.
LAYBOURN, J. & FINLAY, B.J. (1976): Respiratory energy losses related to cell weight and temperature in ciliated protozoa. - Oecologia
(Berlin),24:349 355.
LAYBOURN-PARRY, J. ( 1992): Protozoan plankton ecology. Chapman & Hall, London, New York, Tokyo, Melbourne, Madras. 23 1 pp.
LAYBOURN-PARRY, J. & MARCHANT, H.J. (1992): The microbial plankton of freshwater lakes in the Vestfold Hills, Antarctica. - Polar
Biol., 12: 405-410.
LAYBOURN-PARRY, J. & PERRISS, S.J. (1995): The role and distribution of the autotrophic clliate Mesodinium rubrunt (Myrionecta ru-
bro) inthree Antarctic saline lakes. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 135: 179-194.
LAYBOURN-PARRY, J. & ROGERSON, A. (1993): Seasonal pattems of protozooplankton in Lake Windermere, England. - Arch. Hydro-
biol., 129:2543.
156

Literature
LAYBOURN-PARRY, J., OLVER, J., ROGERSON, A. & DUVERGE, p.L. (1SSO): The temporal and spatial pattems of protozooplankton
abundance in a eutrophic temperate lake. - Hydrobiologia,203:99-1 10.
LAYBOURN-PARRY, J., MARCHANT, H.J. & BROWN, P. (1991): The plankton of a large oligotrophic freshwater Antarctic lake. - J.
Plankton Res., 13: 1131-1149.
LAYBOURN-PARRY, J., MARCHANT, H.J. & BROWN,P.E. (1992): Seasonal cycle of the microbial plankton in Crooked Lake, Antarcti-
ca. - Polar Biol., 12: 411416.
LAYBOURN-PARRY, J., WALTON, M., YOUNG, J., JONES, R.I. & SHINE, A. (1994): Protozooplankton and bacterioplankton in a large
oligotrophic lake - Loch Ness, Scotland. - J. Plankton Res., 16: 1655*1670.
LAYBOURN-PARRY, J., ELLIS-EVANS, J.C. & BUTLER, H. (1996): Microbial dynamics during the summer ice-loss phase in maritime
Antarctic lakes. - J. Plankton Res., 18: 495-511.
LAYBOURN-PARRY, J., JAMES, M.R., MCKNIGHT, D.M., PRISCU, J., SPAULDING, S.A. & SHIEL, R. (1997): The microbial plank-
ton of Lake Fryxell, southern Victoria Land, Antarctica during the summers of 1992 and 1994. - Polar Biol., 17: 5zt-61.
LEE, J.J., SMALL, E.B., LYNN, D.H. & BOVEE, E.C. (1985): Some techniques for collecting, cultivating and observing protozoa. In LEE,
J.J., HUTNER, S.H. & BOVEE, E.C. (eds.): An illustrated guide to the protozoa, pp. lJ .Society of Protozoologists, Lawrence.
LEE, N.M. (1996): Parameters affecting microorganisms and the process performance in biological wastewater treatment. Dissertation Lund
University. 70 pp.
LEE, N.M. & WELANDER, T. (1996): Reducing sludge production in aerobic wastewater treatment through manipulation of the ecosystem.
- Wat. Res., 30: l78l-1790.
LEEGAARD, C. (1920): Microplankton from the Finnish waters during the month of May 1912. - Acta Soc. Fauna Flora fenn., 48: t-41.
LEGNER, M. (1964): Annual observations on ciliates inhabiting the natant vegetation of two naturally polluted pools. - Vest. csl. Spol.
zool.,33: 193-213.
LEIDY, l. (1877): Remarks on the American species of Dffiugia. -Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philad., year 1877:306-308.
LEIDY, J. ( I 879): Fresh-water rhizopods of North America. - Rep. U. S. geol. Surv., 12: I-Xl, l-324.
LEIDY,J.(1880):Remarksonpondlife.-Proc.Acad.Nat.Sci.Philad.,year1880:156-158.
LEITNER, A.R. & FOISSNER, W. (1997): Taxonomic characterization of Epicarchesium granulatum (KELLICOTT, 1887) JANKOWSKI,
1985 and Pseudovorticella elongata (FROMENTEL, 1876) nov. comb., two peritrichs (Protozoa, Ciliophora) from activated sludge. -
Europ. J. Protistol., 33: 13-29.
LELAND, H.V. & KENT, E. (1981): Effects of copper on microfaunal species composition in a Sierra Nevada, Califomia stream. - Verh.
int. Verein. theor. angew. Limnol., 2l:819-829.
LEPSI, I. (1932): On the plankton ofthe Lake Tagaul (Dobrogea). - Bull. Sect. Scient. Acad. roum., 15: 124-136.
LEPSI, L (1957): Infuzori holotrichi din tinoavele de la Poiana Stampei (Raionul Vatra Domei) (Infusoria Holotricha aus Hochmooren der
Ostkarpathen (Poiana Stampei, Bez. Vatra Dornei)). - Buletin sti. Acad. Repub. pop rom., Sectia de biologie si stiinte agricole, Seria
zoologie, 9: 5-13 (in Romanian with Russian and German summary).
LEPSI, L (1960): Noi specii de infuzori (Neue Infusorienarten). - Comunle Acad. Rep. pop. rom., l0: 1095-1 101 (in Roumanian with Rus-
sian and German summary).
LEPSI, I. (1965); Protozoologie. Academia Republicii Socialiste Romänia, Bucarest. 999 pp.
LE ROUX, M. (1907): Recherches biologiques sur le lac d'Annecy. : Annls Biol. lacustre, 2: l-169.
LEVANDER, K.M. (1892): Verzeichniss der während des Sommers 1891 bei Rostock beobachteten Protozoen. - Arch. Freunde NatGesch.
Mecklenb., 46: 1 13-l 18.
LEVANDER, K.M. (1894): Liste über im Finnischen Meerbusen in der Umgebung von Helsingfors beobachtete Protozoen. -Zool. Anz.,
l7:209-212.
LEVANDER, K.M. (1894a): Materialien zur Kenntniss der Wasserfauna in der Umgebung von Helsingfors, mit besonderer Berücksichti-
gung der Meeresfauna. L Protozoa. - Acta Soc. Fauna Flora fenn., 12: 1-1 15.
LEVANDER, K.M. (1900): Zur Kenntniss des Lebens in den stehenden Kleingewässem auf den Skäreninseln. - Acta Soc. Fauna Flora
fenn., I8: 2-107.
LEVANDER, K.M. (1901): Zur Kenntnis des Planktons und der Bodenfauna einiger seichten Brackwasserbuchten. - Acta Soc. Fauna Flora
fenn.,20: l-34.
LI, C. & LIN, W. (1995): Grazing rate of zooplankton on bacterioplancton in Lake Donghue, Wuhan. - Acta ecol. sin., 15: 142-147 (inChi-
nese with English summary).
LIEB, F., EXNER, H. & ANSCHAU, M. (1956): Über die Beziehung der chemischen Analyse zu den vorgefundenen tierischen und pflanz-
lichen Mikroorganismen in Trink- und Nutzwässern. - Arch. Hyg. Bakt., 1,40:466482.
LIEBMANN, H. (1936): Auftreten, Verhalten und Bedeutung der Protozoen bei der Selbstreinigung stehenden Abwassers. - Z. Hyg. Infekt-
Krankh., 118:2943.
LIEBMANN, H. (1962): Handbuch der Frischwasser- und Abwasser-Biologie. Biologie des Trinkwassers, Badewassers, Fischwassers, Vor-
fluters und Abwassers. Band I. R. Oldenbourg, München. 588 pp.
LIEPA, R. (1973): The seasonal development of ciliata in the Lielupe. - Latv. PSR Zinät. Akad. Vest., year 1973:31-37 (in Russian with
English summary).
LIEPA, R.A. ( 1978): Ecology of free-living ciliates of the Latvian rivers. - Protozoologiya, 3: 58-65 (in Russian with English summary).
LIEPA, R. ( 198 1 ): Infusoria of periphytons in various types of lakes of the Latvian SSR. - Int. Congr. Protozool., 6:217 (Abstract).
LIEPA, R.A. (1983): Ecologo-faunistic characteristics ofciliates in water bodies ofhigher saprobity. - Protozoology, 8:134-141 (in Russian
with English summary).
LIEPA, R. (1986): Infusoria-substrate relationships in the small streams of Latvia. - Symposia Biologica Hungarica,33:.225-232.
LINDHOLM,T.(1985): Mesodiniumrubrum-atniquephotosyntheticciliate.-AdvancesinAquaticMicrobiology,3:1-48.
757

Literature
LINDHOLM, T., LINDROOS, P. & MÖRK, A.-C. (1988): Ultlastructure of the photosynthetic ciliate Mesodinium rubrun. - BioSystems,
2l: l4l-149.
LINNAEUS, C. (17-5tl): Systema Naturae. Vol. I. lOth ed. Salvii, Holmiae. 823 pp.
LINNAEUS, C. (1161): Systema Naturae. Vol. I. l2th ed. Salvii, Holmiae. 1327 pp.
LIPSCOMB, D.L. & RIORDAN, G.P. (1992): A reexamination of the ultrastructure of Didiniunt rtusutunt and a reanalysis of the phylogeny
olthe haptorid ciliates. J. Protozool.,39: I l0 l2l.
LIVINGSTON, J.G. & WALKER, G.K. (1992): Encystment in the stalked peritrich ciliate, Epistylis rotans. Cytobios, 7l:201-209.
LIYEPA, R.A. ( 1984a): The influence ol nutrient elements on the formation of communities of inf usoria. - Hydrobiol. I ., 20: 22-25.
LI YEPA, R.A. ( 1984b): Classificatior.r of Latvian lakes based on species composition of infusoria. - Hydrobiol. J ., 20: 12-16.
LÖFFLATH, K. ( I 967 ): Raubzeug in der Straßenpf ütze. Das Tonnentierchen C olaps h irtus. - M ikrokosmos , 56: 225 226.
LÖFFLER,M.(1961): ZurSystemrtikundÖkologiederchilenischenSüsswasserentomostraken.-Beitr.Neotrop.Fauna,2:143-222.
LOHMANN, H. (l90ti): Untersuchungen zur Feststellung des vollständigen Gehaltes des Meeres an Planktor.r. - Wiss. Meeresunters., Abt.
Kiel (N. F.), l0: 129-.r70.
LOKOT, L.l. (1987): Ökologie der Wimpertiere im Süßwasser des zentralen Baikalgebietes. Akademia Nzruka, Novosibirrt. 152 pp. (in
Russian).
LOM, J. (1964): The morphology and morphogenesis ofthe buccal ciliary organelles in some peritrichous ciliates. - Arch. Protistenk., 107:
l3l
162.
LOM, J. ( I 970): Observations on trichodinid ciliates from fieshwater fishes. - Arch. Protistenk., ll2: 153-111 .
LOM, J. (1913): Trit hodina - ein typischer Schwächeparasit an Fischen. Mikrokosmos, 62: 341-343.
LONCHI, P. ( I 892): Protisti delle acque dolci di Genova e dintomi. - Atti Soc. ligust. Sci. nat. geogr., 3: I 37- l6l .
LONGHI, P. ( I 894): Prime ricerche intorno ai protisti del distretto di Belluno e suoi dintorni. - Atti Soc. ligust. Sci. nat. geogr., 5: 13-21 .
LUCKINBILL, L.S. (1973): Coexistence in laboratory populations of Paranrcciunt owelia and its predatol Ditliniunt tktsutunt. - Ecology,
54: 1320-132'7.
LUCKINB ILL, L.S. ( 1974): The effects of space and enrichment on a predator-prey system. - Ecology, 55: I142-1147 .
LÜFTENEGGER, G., FOISSNER, W. & ADAM, H. ( 1985): r- and K-selection in soil ciliates: a field and experimenral approach. - Oecolo-
gia (Berlin), 66: 51 4-519.
LUGO, A., SÄNCHEZ, M.D.R., G}NZALEZ, M.E. & ALCoCER, J. (1998): Temporal patterns of plankronic ciliates abundance in rhree
eutrophic urban lakes. Verh. int. Verein. theor. angew. Limnol.,26:1626 1630.
LUK'JANOVIÖ, L.M. (1973): The specitic composition and quantitative characteristics of infusoria in the pelagic zone of Lake Naroch. -
Vestnik Belorusskogo Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta imeni V. I. Lenina, year 1973: 38-41 (in Russian).
LUK'JANOVIÖ,L.M. (1974): Infusoria of plankton in Lake Myastro. - Vestnik Belorusskogo Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta imeni V.I.,
Ser. 2, year 1974: 3942 (in Russian).
LUNA-PABELLO, V.M., PLISSON-SAUNE, S., PAUL, E. & DURÄN DEBAZÜA, C. (1996): Ciliatological characrerization of a biologi-
cal reactor that eliminates nitrogen with intermitent aeration. - Revta lat.-am. Microbiol., 38: 89-96.
LUNDIN, F.C. & WEST, L.S. ( 1963): The free-living protozoa of the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. Northern Michigan College Press, Mar-
quette. 175 pp.
LUST, S. ( I 950): Symphorionte Peritrichen auf Käfern und Wanzen. Zool. Jb. Syst., 79: 353 436.
LYNCH, J.E. & NOBLE, A.E. ( 193 l): Notes on the genus Endosphaera ENGELMANN and on its occasional host Opisthonetta henneguyi
FAUR6-FREMIET. - Univ. Calif. Publs Zool.,36:91-115.
LYNN, D.H. ( 1976): Comparative ultrastructure and systematics of the Colpodida. Structural conservatism hypothesis and a description of
C o I p oda.rteirri MAUPAS. J. Protozool., 23: 302-3 | 4.
LYNN, D.H. & MONTAGNES, D.J.S. (1988): Taxonomic descriptions of some conspicuous species of strobilidiine ciliates (Ciliophora:
Choreotrichida) fiom the Isles of Shoals, Gulf of Maine. -J. mar. biol. Ass. U. K.,68:639-658.
LYNN, D.H. & NICHOLLS, K.H. (1985): Cortical microtubular structures of the ciliate Lepitlorratltalophyllunt.ft»'ttitis NICHOLLS &
LYNN, 1984 and phylogeny of the litostomate ciliates. Can.I.Zool.,63: 1835 1845.
LYNN, D.H., MONTAGNES, D.J.S., DALE, T., GILRON, G.L. & STROM, S.L. (1991): A reassessment of the genus Stt'onthidinopsis (Ci-
liophora, Choreotrichida) with descriptions offour new planktonic species and remarks on its taxonomy and phylogeny. - J. mar. biol.
Ass. U. K., 7l:591-612.
MA,Z. (1994): Investigation on protozoan in Yellow River, Lanzhou, Gansu. Journal of the Northwest Normal University (Natural Sci-
ence), 30: 93-96 (in Chinese with English summary).
MACEK, M. (1994): Distribution of ciliates in the Rimov Reservoir. - Arch. Hydrobiol. Beih. Ergebn. Lirnnol. , 40: 131-l4l
.
MACEK, M., VILACLARA, G. & LUGO, A. (1994): Changes in protozoan assemblage structure and activity in a stratitied tropical lake. -
Marine Microbial Food Webs, 8:235-249.
MACEK, M., SIMEK, K., PERNTHALER, J., VYHNÄLEK, V. & PSENNER, R. (1996): Growth rates of dominant planktonic ciliates in
two fieshwater bodies of different trophic degree. - J. Plankton Res., 18: 463481.
MADONI, P. (19'79): The ciliated protozoa in Torrente Parma, Torrente Stirone, and Fiume Po. In GHETTI, P.F. (ed.): Biological water as-
sessment methods Torrente Parma, Torrente Stirone, Fiume Po, Parma, October 1978, pp. 291-312. Commission of the European Com-
munities, Bruxelles.
MADONI, P. ( 1980): Zonazioni longitudinali dei corsi d'acqua e distribuzione dei protozoi ciliati. - Atti V Conv. Gr. "G. Gadio", year 1980:
39-58.
MADONI, P. ( 198 I ): I protozoi ciliati degli impianti biologici di depurazione - Guida al riconoscimento e utilizzazione. Consiglio nazionale
delle ricerche AQlll167, Roma. 134 pp.
MADONI, P. ( 1986): Abundance, productivity and energy flow of a populal.ion of Coleps lirtrs NITZSCH (Protozoa, Ciliophora) during the
first stage of colonization in an experimental ricefield. - Arch. Protistenk.,132: 43-51.
158

Literature
MADONI, P. (1987): Colonization and seasonal succession of the ciliated protozoa populations in a ricefield ecosystem. - Acta
Oecologica/Oecologia Generalis ,8: 5l 1-522.
MADONI, P. (1988): Distribution and seasonal succesion of ciliated protozoa in a ricefield ecosystem: a three-year study. - Verh. int. Ver-
ein. theor. angew. Limnol., 23: 1063-1061.
MADONI, P. (19U9): Community structure of the microzoobenthos in Lake Suviana (Tusco-Emilian Apennines). - Boll. Zool.,56: 159-165.
MADONI, P. (1990): The ciliated protozoa of the monomictic Lake Kinneret (lsrael): species composition and distribution during stratifica-
tion. - Hydrobiologia, 190: lll-120.
MADONI, P. (1991a): Microzoobenthos in the Brasimone reservoir (Tusco-Emilian Apennines): community structure and distribution. -
Verh. int. Verein. theor. angew. Limnol., 24: 1405 1408.
MADONI, P. (l99lb): Community structure and distribution of ciliated protozoa in a freshwater pond covered by Lenma ntinor. - Boll.
Zool.,58: 273-279.
MADONI, P. (1996): The contribution of ciliated protozoa to plankton and benthos biomass in a European ricefield. - J. Euk. Microbiol., 43:
I 93- I s8.
MADONI, P. & GHETTI, P.F . (1911): Indagine preliminare sulla distribuzione dei ciliati e altri Protozoi nei corsi d'acqua della Val Parma. -
Rivista di ldrobiologia, 16: 35-53.
MADONI, P. & GHETTI, P.F. (1980): Etude de la dynamique des populations de cilies d'un torrent experimental pendant deux annees. -
Hydrobiologia, 7 4: 27 3-282.
MADONI, P. & GHETTI, P.F. (1981): Ciliated protozoa and water quality in the Torrente Stirone (Northem Italy). - Acta hydrobiol.,
Krak6w, 23:143-154.
MADONI, P. & VIAROLI, P. (1985): Microfauna distribution in shallow macrophyte-covered basins. - Verh. int. Verein. theor. angew.
Limnol., 22: 2353-2355.
MADONI, P., ANTONIETTI, R., PISI, R. & VIAROLI, P. (1985): Effects of crude cellulose decomposition on the ciliate community in ac-
tivated sludge. - Atti det secondo congresso nazionale della societa italiana di ecologia Padova 25-28 giugnu 1984, S. IT. E. Atti, 5:
869-812.
MADONI, P., BERMAN, T., HADAS, O. & PINKAS, R. (1990): Food selection and growth of the planktonic c1l\ate Coleps &lltu.s isolated
from amonomictic subtropical lake. -J. Plankton Res., 12: 135 :741.
MADRAZO-GARIBAY, M. &LöPEZ-OCHOTERENA, E. (1985): Prorozoarios ciliados de Mdxico. XXVI. Anälisis morfol6gico y ta-
xondmico de treinta y cinco especies de la Laguna de T6rminos, Campeche. - Anales Instituto de Ciencias del Mar y Limnologia Uni-
versidad Nacional Aut6nomia de M6xico, 12: 199-212. !
MAEDA, M. ( 1986): An illustrated guide to the species of the families Halteriidae and Strobilidiidae (Oligotrichida, Ciliophora), free swim-
ming protozoa common in the aquatic environment. - Bull. Ocean Res. Inst., Univ. Tokyo, 2l: l-61.
MAEDA, M. & CAREY, P.C. (1985): An illustrated guide to the species of the family Strombidiidae (Oligotrichida, Ciliophora), free swim-
ming protozoa common in the aquatic environment. - Bull. Ocean Res. Inst., Univ. Tokyo, 19: l-68.
MALY, E.J. (1978): Stability of the interaction between Didinium and Paramecium: effects of dispersal and predator time lag. - Ecology,
59:733-741.
MAMAEVA, N.V. (1973): Preliminary results of the study of infusoria in the inshore zone of the Rybinskoe reservoir. - Inf. Byul. Akad.
Nauk U.R.S.R., 18: 28-31 (in Russian).
MAMAEVA, N.V. (1974a): On the study of infusoria in the Ivankovskoe reservoir. - Informacionnij Byulleten. Biologija Vnutrennich Vod.
Akademija Nauk SSSR, No.23: 33-36 (in Russian).
MAMAEVA, N.V. ( 1974b): Study of the protozoa in the Volga. - Informacionnij Byulleten. Biologija Vnutrennich Vod. Akademija Nauk
SSSR, No.2l:28-32 (in Russian).
MAMAEVA, N.V. (1976a): Planktonic ciliates in the Ivan'kovsky_water reservoir. Zool.Zh.,55:651464 (in Russian with English sum-
mary).
MAMAEVA, N.V. (1976b): Planktonic ciliates of the shore zone of the Rybinskoje Reservoir. - Trudy Instituta Biologii Vnutrennich Vod.,
33: 152-l6l (in Russian).
MAMAEVA, N.V. (1979): Infusoria of the Volga basin. Ecological survey. Nauka, Leningrad. l5l pp. (in Russian).
MAMAEVA, N.V. (1979a): Protozoa (Sarcodina, Ciliata, Suctoria). - Monographiae biol.,33: 232-234.
MAMAEVA, N.V. (1979b): Class Ciliata. - Monographiae biol., 33: 408-41l.
MAMAEVA, N.V. ( 1988): Ciliates as a component of planktonic community of the open areas of Baltic Sea. - Biologiya Morya, Vladivos-
tock, year 1988:24)8 (in Russian with English summary).
MAMAEVA, N.V. & PAVL'VA, E.B. (1974): Food spectrum of Coleps ftil'/,/.r NITZSCH, l8l7 (Infusoria, Holotricha). Informacionnij
Byulleten. Biologija Vnutrennich Vod. Akademija Nauk SSSR, No.22: 24-26 (in Russian).
MAMAYEVA, N.V. ( 1975): The planktonic infusoria of the Volga. - Hydrobiol. J., ll:21-25.
MAMAYEVA, N.V. & KOPYLOV, A.I. (1978): A study of feeding in fresh-water ciliates. - Tsitologiya, 20: 472415 (in Russian with
English summary).
MARGALEF, R. (1948): Miscelänea de zoologia dulciacuicola, II. - Publnes Inst. Biol. apl., Barcelona, 5:69-76.
MARSSON, M. (1901): Zur Kenntnis der Planktonverhältnisse einiger Gewässer der Umgebung von Berlin. - ForschBer. biol. Stn PIön, 8:
86-t 19.
MARTIN, A.J. & MONTAGNES, D.J.S. (1993): Winter ciliates in a British Columbian fjord: six new species and an analysis of ciliate puta-
tive prey. - J. Euk. Microbiol., 40:535 549.
MARTiN-GONZALEZ, A., SERRANO, S. & FERNÄNDEZ-GALIANO, D. (1985): IJron'icha vitrea n. sp. (Ciliophora, Prorodontina): ge-
neral morphology and cytological events during the conjugation process. - Can. J. Zool., 63: I 885-1 89 I .
MARTIN-GONZALEZ, A., SERRANO, S. & FERNÄNDEZ-GALIANO, D. (1990): On the morphology, morphogenesis, and argyrome of
Disentatosknru buetsc'hlii (Ciliophora, Frontoniidae). - Can. J. Zool., 68: 245-253.
759

Literature
MASKELL, W.M. ( I 887): On the freshwater infusoria of the Wellington district. - Trans. Proc. N. Z. Inst., 20: 3-19.
MASSANA, R. & PEDRÖS-ALIÖ, C. (1994): A method to determine integrated predation in stratified waters. - Limnol. Oceanogr., 39:
248-262.
MASSANA, R., GASOL, J.M. & PEDR6S-ALIÖ, C. (1994): Interrupted succession of ciliate communities in sharply stratified metalimnia.
- Marine Microbial Food Webs, 8: 189-200.
MAST, S.O. (1909): The reactions of Didinium nasutum (STEIN) with special reference to the feeding habits and the function of trichocysts.
- Biol. Bull. mar. biol. Lab., Woods Hole, 16: 9l-l18.
MAST, S.O. & IBARA, Y. (1923): The effect of temperature, food, and the age of the culture on the encystment of Didinium nasutum. -
Biol. Bull. mar. biol. Lab., Woods Hole,45: 105-112.
MATHES, J. & ARNDT, H. (1994): Biomass and composition of protozooplankton in relation to lake trophy in north German lakes. - Mari-
ne Microbial Food Webs, 8:35'7-3'75.
MATHES, J. & ARNDT, H. (1995): Annual cycle of protozooplankton (ciliates, flagellates and sarcodines) in relation to phyto- and metazo-
oplankton in Lake Neumühler See (Mecklenburg, Germany). - Arch. Hydrobiol., 134337-358.
MATIS, D. (1961): Pr(spevok k poznaniu fauny nälevnikov (Ciliata) dvoch mrtvych ramien dunaja (Beitrag zur Kenntnis von Wimperlingen
(Ciliata) in zwei toten Donau-Flussarmen). - Biol6gia, Bratisl., 16: ll l-114 (in Czech with Russian and German summary).
MATIS, D. (1966): Bemerkungen über die Infusorienfauna der Regentümpel vom St. Georg-Moorwald. - Acta Fac. Rerum nat. Univ.
comen., Bratisl., Series Zoologia, 13: 235-239.
MATIS, D. ( 1967): Nälevniky (Ciliata) z oblasti budricej vodnej nädrZe pod Vihorlatom (Wimpertiere (Ciliata) aus der Gegend des zukünfti-
gen Wasserreservoirs unter dem Vihorlat). - Acta Fac. Rerum nat. Univ. comen., Bratisl., Series Zoologia, 12:9-12 (in Czech with Rus-
sian and German summary).
MATIS, D. (1975): Infusoriaof the order Hypotrichida in some localities in the vicinity of Bratislava. *Biol6gia, Bratisl.,30:583-588.
MATIS, D. (1971): Prispevok k poznaniu nälevnikov (Ciliata) Zemplinskej §iravy (Contribution to the knowledge of infusoria of Zemplins-
ka §irava). - Acta Fac. Rerum nat. Univ. comen., Bratisl., Series Zoologia,22: 2143 (in Czech with English and Russian summary).
MATIS, D. & STRAKOVÄ-STRIESKOVÄ, u. ltlOt;: Nälevniky (Ciliophora) tepl6ho potoka a termälnych jazierok bojnickj'ch küpel'ov.
(Ciliates (Ciliophora) of the Teplj, brook and thermal lakes in Bojnice spa (Czecho-Slovakia). - Biol6gia, Bratisl., 46: I l3-l l8 (in
Czech with English and Russian summary).
MATIS, D. & TIRJAKOVÄ, E. ( 1994a): Contribution to the knowledge of Ciliophora of the river Morava. - Ekologia (CSSR) Supplement,
lll994:5541.
MATIS, D. & TIRJAKOVÄ, E. (1994b): Nälevnfty (Ciliophora) mitveho ramena Dunaja v Öiöore (Ciliated protozoa (Ciliophora) in dead
arm ofDanube in Cicov (Slovakia)). - Acta Fac. Rerum nat. Univ. comen., Bratisl., Series Zoologia, 16 (year 1992):49-56 (in Slovaki-
an with English summary).
MATIS, D. & TIRJAKOVÄ, E. (1995): The impact of the hydroelectric power structures Gaböikovo on the ciliate communities
(Ciliophora). Gaböikovo Part ofthe Hydrolelectric Power Project - Environmental Impact Review, year 1995: 241-250.
MATSUOKA, T., MATSUO, N., MAESAKO, J. & SHIGENAKA, Y. (1983): Distribution of fresh-water protozoa I. Municipal and subur-
bandistrictsof HiroshimaandHigashi-Hiroshima.-Bull.biol.Soc.HiroshimaUniv.,49: l3-18(inJapanesewithEnglishsummary).
MATTHE§, D. (1950): Beitrag zur Peritrichenfauna der Umgebung Erlqngens. -Zool. Jb. Syst., 79: 431448.
MATTHES, D. (1988): Suctoria (Sauginfusorien). - Protozoenfatna,Tll:l-XlII, l-226,307-309.
MAUCH, E. (1990): Der ökologische Zustand der Alb im Stadtgebiet von Karlsruhe und die Auswirkungen der Einleitung von Kühlwasser
und Abwasser. - Limnologie aktuell, 1: 59-85.
MAUPAS, E. (1883): Contribution a l'6tude morphologique et anatomique des infusoires cili6s. - Archs Zool. exp. g6n.,2" S6rie, 1:
421 464.
MAYER, J., DOKULIL, M.T., SALBRECHTER, M., BERGER, M., POSCH, T., PFISTER, G., KIRSCHNER, A.K.T., VELIMIROV, B.,
STEITZ, A. & ULBRICHT, T. (1997): Seasonal successions and trophic relations between phytoplankton, zooplankton, ciliate and bac-
teria in a hypertrophic shallow lake in Vienna, Austria. - Hydrobiologia, 3421343: 165-174.
MAYER, K. (1938): Zur Kenntnis der Buchenhöhlenfauna. -Arch. Hydrobiol.,33: 388-400.
MAYER, P. (1998): Actinobolina-Arten sind Ciliaten mit langen Tentakeln zum Beutefang. - Mikrokosmos,ST: 129-133.
MAZHEIKAITE, S.l. (1969): Horizontal distribution of the planktonic protozoa in the Lake Onega in the period of summer stagnation. -
Vest. leningr. gos. Univ., year 1969 (No. 15): 23-30 (in Russian with English summary).
MCCASHLAND, B.W. ( 1956): A preliminary study of the fresh water protozoan fauna of Mount Desert Island. - Bull. Mt Desert Isl. biol.
Lab.,4:36-38.
MCGRADY-STEED, J. & MORIN, P.J. (1996): Disturbance and the species composition of rain pool microbial communities. - Okois, 76:
93-102.
MEIER, B.G. & RECK, E. (1994): Nanoflagellate and ciliate grazing on bacteria. - Ecological Studies Analysis and Synthesis, 105:
251-269.
MERMOD, G. (1914): Recherches sur la faune infusorienne des tourbiöres et des eaux voisines de Sainte-Croix (Jura vaudois). - Revue
suisse Zool., 22: 31-1 1 4.
MERRELL, J.R. & STOECKER, D.K. (1998): Differential grazing on protozoan microplankton by developmental stages of the calanoid
copepod Eurytemora ffinis POPPE. - J. Plankton Res., 20: 289-304.
MESSIKOMMER, E. (1952): Vergleichende Untersuchungen des Oberflächenplanktons von vier verschiedenartigen Gewässem in der Ge-
gend des Pfäffikersees Oberes Glattal, Kanton Zürich, Schweiz. - Schweiz. Z. Hydrol., 14: 19l-256.
MESSIKOMMER, E. (1954): Zur Kenntnis der niederen Sumpf- und Wasserfauna der Gegend des Pfäffikersees (Kt. Zürich). - Revue suisse
Zool.,61:. 635-656.
160

Literature
MEUCHE, A. (1939): Die Fauna im Algenbewuchs. Nach Untersuchungen im Litoral ostholsteinischer Seen. Arch. Hydrobiol.,34:
349-520.
MEUNIER, A. (1910): Microplankton des Mers de Barents et de Kara. Campagne Arctique de 1907. C. Bulens, Bruxelles. 355 pp.
MICHIELS, M. (1974): Biomass determination of some freshwater ciliates. - Biol. Jaarb., 42: 132-136.
MICOLETZKY, H. (1913): Zur Kenntnis des Faistenauer Hintersees bei Salzburg, mit besonderer Berücksichtigung faunistischer und fi-
schereilicher Verhältnisse. Nachtrag zur Litoralfauna. - lnt. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 4: l-ll.
MIEGEL, H. ( 1982): Interpretation von Planktonproben zur Charakterisierung von Kleingewässem. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 95: 249-262.
MIHAILOWITSCH, B. ( 1989): Taxonomische und ökologische Untersuchungen an Ciliaten (Protozoa, Ciliophora) in solebelasteten Fliess-
gewässern. Dissertation Universität Bonn.29l pp, Anhang 33 pp.
MINKEWITSCH, R. (1898): Quelques observations sur les protozoaires, faites ä la Station biologique de Bolo9o6. - Trudy imp. S-peterb.
Obshch. Estest., 29: 239-246,267-269 (in Russian with French summary).
MIRABDULLAEV, I.M. (1985): Two new species of the oligociliated infusorians (Ciliophora, Oligotrichida) from water reservoirs of Uz-
bekistan. - Zool. Zh., 64: 1892-1893 (in Russian with English summary).
MIRABDULLAEV, I.M. (1988): Development of planktonic infusoria in fish ponds of Tashkent region. - Uzbekshig biologiceskij Zhurnal,
year 1988: 6245 (in Russian).
MIRABDULLAEV, I.M. (1989): Development of planktonic infusoria in spawning ponds of Tashkent region. - Uzbekshig biologiceskij
Zhurnal, year 1989: 53-56 (in Russian).
MIRACLE, M.R., VICENTE, E. & PEDRÖS-ALIÖ, C. (1992): Biological studies of Spanish meromictic and stratified karstic lakes. - Lim-
netica, S: 59-77.
MITIS, H.v. (1941): Ökologische Studien am Lusthauswasser, einem Altwasser im Prater von Wien. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 37:426 465.
MIYAKE, A. & HARUMOTO, T. ( 1996): Defensive function of trichocysts in Paramecium against the predatory clliate Monodiniunt balbi-
ani. Europ. J. Protistol., 32:. 128-133.
MLECZKO, A. (1965): The surface distribution of zooplankton in the Goczalkowice Reservoir in the years 195'7-1959. - Acta hydrobiol.,
Krak6w, 7:341-361.
MODENUTTI, B.E. (1988): Presencia deOphrydiuru nauntanni PEJLER (Ciliophora, Peritrichida) en lagos andinos rionegrinos. Neotro-
pica,36:99 103.
MODENUTTI, B.E. (1997): Distribuci6n de los ciliados planct6nicos Ophrydium naumanni y Stentor arau('anus en lagos oligotr6ficos An-
dinos. - Revta Soc. mex. Hist. nat., 47:'19-83.
MODENUTTI, 8.E., BALSEIRO, E.G. & MOELLER, R. ( 1998): Vertical distribution and resistance to ultraviolet radiation of a planktonic
ciliate, Stentor araucanus. Verh. int. Verein. theor. angew. Limnol., 26: 1636-164O.
MOLTMANN, J. (1978): Die Wirkung kurzzeitiger thermaler Belastung auf Stoffhaushalt und Ciliatenbesiedlung aquatischer Modellökosy-
steme. - Verh. Ges. Ökologie, Kiel, 11 (year 1977):3ll-315.
MONARD, A. (1920): La faune profonde du lac de Neuchatel. - Bull. Soc. neuchätel. Sci. nat., 44 (years l9l8-1919): 65-235.
MONTAGNES, D.J.S. & LYNN, D.H. (1987): A quantitative protargol stain (QPS) for ciliates: method description and test of its quantitati-
ve nature. - Mar. Microbial Food Webs, 2:83-93.
MONTAGNES, D.J.S. & LYNN, D.H. (1993): A quantitative protargol stain (QPS) for ciliates and other protists. In KEMP, P.F., SHERR,
8.F., SHERR, E.B. & COLE, J.J. (eds.): Handbook of methods in aquatic microbial ecology, pp.229-240. Lewis Publishers, Boca Ra-
ton, Ann Arbor, London, Tokyo.
MOODY, J.E. (1912): Observations on the [ife-history of two rare ciliates, Spathidiunt spathula and Attinoholus rodians. - J. Moryh., 23:
34940'7.
MORAVCOVÄ, V. ( 1962): The cultivation and sequence of protozoa from the polluted streams. - Sb. vys. Sk. chem.-techn ol. Praze, 6 (2):
345435.
MORAVCOVÄ,Y.(1977):Addendatothelistof protozoaassaprobicindicators.-Arch.Hydrobiol.Beih.Ergebn.Limnol.,g: l6l-168.
MORAVCOVÄ, V. (1986): The indicator value of free-living protozoa. - Symposia Biologica Hungarica, 33: 199204.
MORDUKHAJ-BOLTOVSKAJA, E.D. (1965): Some data on the biology of the ciliates of the Rybinsk reservoir. - Trudy Instituta Biologii
Vnutrennich Vod. (Moskva), 8: 3-l I (in Russian).
MORI, S. (1970): List of animal and plant species living in or on Lake Biwa. - Mem. Fac. Sci. Kyoto Univ. (N. S.), Series of Biology, 3:
2246.
MOROZOVSKAYA, O.l. & POLISHCHUK, V.V. (1969): New and rare forms of infusoria of the Tintinnoinea suborder from the Danube
estuaries within the limits of the Ukraine. - Vest. zoologii. Institut Zoologü. Akademia Nauk Ukrainskoi SSR, 1: 77 8l (in Russian with
English summary).
MOVCHAN, V.A. & PROTASOV, A.A. ( 1986): Protozoans in the periphyton of the cooling pond of the Chemobyl nuclear power station. -
Hydrobiol. J., 22: 103-105.
MT (Ministry of Technology) ( 1968): Protozoa in sewage-treatment processes. Notes Wat. Pollut., No. 43: 4 pp.
MÜCKE, G. (1979): Ökologische Untersuchungen der Ciliaten in Gewässern des Naturschutzgebietes "Heiliges Meer" unter besonderer Be-
rücksichtigung zönologischer Gesichtspunkte. - Arb. Inst. landw. Zool. Bienenkd., 5: | 215.
MUDREZOWA-WYSS, K. (1929): Eine neue Form der Infusoria aspirotricha. ,,Triloba paradoxa" nov. gen. nov. sp. - Arch. Protistenk.,
68:422-426.
MÜLLER, H. (1989): The relative importance of different ciliate taxa in the pelagic food web of Lake Constance. - Microb. Ecot., 18:
261-273.
MÜLLER, H. (1991): Pseudobalanion plant'tonit'um (Citiophora, Prostomatida): ecological significance of an algivorous nanociliate in a
deep meso-eutrophic lake. - J. Plankton Res., 13: 247-262.
MÜLLER, H. (1996): Encystment of the freshwater ciliate Pelagosn'ombidiunt fallax (Ciliophora, Oligotrichida) in laboratory culture. -
Aquat. microb. Ecol., l1: 289-295.
761

Literature
MÜLLER, H. ( 1999): Evidence of dormancy in planktonic oligotrich ciliates. - Verh. int. Verein. theor. angew. Limnol., in press.
MÜLLER, H. & GELLER, W. (1993): Maximum growth rates of aquatic ciliated protozoa: the dependence on body size and temperature re-
considered. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 126: 3 1 5-327 .
MÜLLER, H. & WEISSE, T. ( 1994): Laboratory and field observations on the scuticociliate Histiobalantium from the pelagic zone of Lake
Constance, FRG. - J. Plankton Res., 16: 391401.
MÜLLER, H. & WÜNSCH, C. (1998): Seasonal dynamics of cyst formation of pelagic strombidiid ciliates in a deep prealpine lake. -
Aquat. microb. Ecol., in press.
MÜLLER, H., SCHÖNE, A., PINTO-COELHO, R.M., SCHWEIZER, A. & WEISSE, T. (1991): seasonal succession of ciliates in Lake
Constance. - Microb. Ecol., 21: I l9-138.
MÜLLER, O.F. (1773): Vermium Terrestrium et Fluviatilium, seu Animalium Infusoriorum, Helminthicorum et Testaceorum, non Marinor-
um, Succincta Historia. Heineck & Faber, Havniae & Lipsiae. 135 pp.
MÜLLER, O.F. (1786): Animalcula Infusoria Fluviatitia et Marina, quae Detexit, Sytematice Descripsit et ad Vivum Delineari Curavit. N.
Mölleri. Hauniae. 361 pp.
MÜLLER-SOLGER, A., BRETT, M.T., LUECKE, C., ELSER, J.J. & GOLDMAN, C.R. (1997): The effecrs of plankrivorous fish (golden
shiners) on the ciliate community of a mesotrophic lake. - J. Plankton Res., 19: 18 l5-l 828.
MÜNCH, F. (1970): Der Einfluß der Temperatur aufden Peptonabbau und die damit verknüpfte Organismensukzession unter besonderer
Berücksichtigung der Populationsdynamik der Ciliaten. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 55: 559-594.
MUNOZ, A.,TqLLEZ, C. & FERNÄNDEZ-GALIANO, D. (1987): Morphology and infraciliature in [Jroü'icha nais sp. n. and lJrotricha
castalia sp. n. (Ciliophora, Prorodontida). - Acta Protozool.,26:. 197-2O4.
MUNOZ, A., TELLEZ, C. & FERNÄNDEZ-GALIANO, D. (1989): Description of the infraciliature and morphogenesis in the ciliate
U rot r i c ha o ndi na n. sp. (Prorodontida, Urotrichidae). - J. Protozool., 36: 1 0zl- I 09.
MURAMATSU, S. (1957): A preliminary survey of protozoa in the City of Hakodate and Oonuma Park. - Misc. Rep. Yamashina Inst. Orn.
Zool.,32: 46647 | (in Japanese with English summary).
MUSAEV, M.A. & IBADOV, R.R. ( 1980): On the method of calculating biomass of soil protozoans. - Izv. Akad. Nauk azerb. SSR (Biolo-
gicueskie), year 1980: 57-61 (in Russian).
MYLNIKOVA, S.M. (1981): The study of perifyton ciliates of the inshore zone of the Rybinsk Reservoir. - Informacionnij Byulleten. Bio-
logija Vnutrennich Vod. Akademija Nauk SSSR, No. 52:23-26 (in Russian).
MYLNIKOVA, Z.M. (1992a): Plankton infusoria in the open part of the Rybinsk reservoir. - Biologiya Vnutrennikh Vod Informatsionnyi
Byulleten, 93:3943 (in Russian with English summary). I
MYLNIKOVA, Z.M. (1992b): Ciliates of the Ivankovo reservoir. - Biologiya vnutrennikh vod informatsionnyi Byulleten, 95: 33-37 (in
Russian).
MYLNIKOVA, Z.M. (1993): The qualitative composition and distribution of planktonic infusoria. Trudy Instituta Biologii Vnutrennich
Vod. (Moskva), 67:. l9l-204 (in Russian).
NACHTIGALL, W. (1999): Warum sinken kleine Plankter so langsam ab? Eine physikalisch-ökologische Betrachtung. - Mikrokosmos, 88:
157-166.
NAEF, J. ( 1995): Plancton du Lac L6man (XX). - Ann6e 1994. - Saussurea,26: 85-112.
NAEF, J. & MARTIN, P. (1983): Plancton du Lac L6man (VIII) Ann6e 1982. - Archs Sci., Gendve, 36:419-500.
NAEF, J. & MARTIN, P. (1985): Plancton du L6man (X) annde 1984. - Archs Sci., Genöve, 38 l'77-199.
NAEF, J. & MARTIN, P. (1990): Plancton du Lac L6man (XIV) ann6e 1988. - Archs Sci., Genöve, 43:307-334.
NAEF, J. & MARTIN, P. (1993a): Plancton du Lac L6man (XVII) ann6e 1991. - Archs Sci., Genöve,46: 103-136.
NAEF, J. & MARTIN, P. (1993b): Plancton du Lac L6man (XVID. - Ann6e 1992. - Saussurea,24:95-126.
NAEF, J. & MARTIN, P. (1994): Plancton du Lac L6man (XIX). - Ana6e 1993. - Saussurea, 25: 89-l19.
NAEF, J., FINK, A. & GREPPIN, H. (1996): Plancton du Lac L6man (XXI). - Ann6e 1995. - Saussurea,2T: l2l-152.
NAIDENOW, V. (1962): Untersuchungen über das Zooplankton.der Donau vor dem bulgarischen Ufer. - C. r. Acad. bulg. Sci., 15:
77 t-774.
NAIDU, K.V. ( 1965): Studies on freshwater protozoa of South India II: Ciliophora. - Hydrobiologia, 25: 545-570.
NAIR, K.N. ( I 97 I ): On a new species of hymenostomatous ciliate (Protozoa: Frontoniidae) from India. - Proc. Indian Acad. Sci., Section B,
73:14-11 .
NARAYANA MURTHY, K.V. & KASTURI BAI, A.R. (1974): Stentor tartari sp. n. from India. - J. Protozool., 2l: 505-506.
NAUMANN, E. (1925): Über eine planktische Modifikation von Ophrydium versatile EHRENB. Arch. Hydrobiol.,15: 494-496.
NAUWERCK, A. (1963): Die Beziehungen zwischen Zooplankton und Phytopiankton im See Erken. - Symb. bot. upsat., 17: l-163.
NAUWERCK, A. (1996): Trophische Strukturen im Pelagial des meromiktischen Höllerersees (Oberösterreich). - Ber. Nat.-Med. Ver. Salz-
burg,11: 14'7-178.
NEBRAT, A.A. (1975): Dynamics of the abundance and biomass of planktonic infusorians in the open waters of the Kremenchug reservoir,
theirproductionandimportanceinthedecompositionof organicmatter.-Hydrobiol.J., 11: ll-19.
NEBRAT, A.A. ( 1980): Planktonic infusoria of Kiev and Kremenchug reservoirs. - Gidrobiol. Zh., 16: 3O-35 (in Russian with English sum-
mary).
NEBRAT, A.A. (1990): Planktonic infusoria in the Kakhova reservoir. - Hydrobiol. J.,26:76-77 (in Russian with English summary).
NEBRAT, A.A. ( l99l ): Planktonic infusoria in the Kanev reservoir. - Gidrobiol. Zh., 27: 14-18 (in Russian with English summary).
NEBRAT, A.A. (1992): Planktonic infusoria in the lower flow of the Pripyat river. - Gidrobiot. Zh.,28: 2'7-31 (in Russian with English
summary).
NENNINGER, U. (1948): Die Peritrichen der Umgebung von Erlangen mit besonderer Berücksichtigung ihrer Wirtsspezifirär. - Zool. lb.
Syst.,77: 169-266.
762

Literature
NESTERENKO, G.V. & KOVALCHUK, A.A. (1991): Determination of the ciliates' individual mass by the improved "volumes ratio" me-
thod. Acta hydrochim. hydrobiol., 19:23-28.
NICHOLLS,K.H.&LYNN,D.H.(1984): Lepiclotrachalolthyllunt.fornicis,n.g.,n.sp.,aciliatewithanexternallayerof organicscales(Ci-
liophora, Litostomatea, Haptoria). - J. Protozool., 3l:413419.
NIE,D.(1933):Notesonthreenewspeciesof fresh-waterTintinnoinea.-Contr.biol.Lab.Sci.Soc.China,9:165 175.
NIEDERLE,HNER, B.R. & CAIRNS, J.Jr. ( 1990): Effects of increasing acidity on aquatic protozoan communities. - Water, Air, Soil Polluti-
on.52: 183 196.
NIEDERLE,HNER, B.R. & CAIRNS, J.Jr. ( 1992): Community response to cumulative toxic impact: effects of acclimation on zinc tolerance
ofaufwuchs. Can. J. Fish. aquat. Sci., 49:2155-2163.
NIKOLAEV, I.l. ( 1979): Microzonal concentration of limnic zooplankton of the surfäce. - Gidrobiol. Zh., 15: 3l4l (in Russian with Eng-
lish surnmary).
NILSSON, J.R. (1986): The African heterotrich cilia:e, Stcntor andrcseni sp. nov., and S. anrctltystinrrs LEIDY. A comparative ultrastructu-
ral study. Biol. Skr., 27: 143.
NING, Y., WANG, S., MA, Z. et al. ( 1993): L.rvestigations on the freshwater protozoa in Lanchou. - Chin. J. Zool.,28: l-3 (in Chinese).
NIPKOW,F.(1956): EpistylisrotarisSVECimPlanktondesZürichsees.EinBeitragzurBiologiediesesPlanktoninfusoriums.-Schweiz.Z.
Hydrol., 18: l6l-170.
NISBET, B. (1984): Nutrition and f'eeding strategies in protozoa. Croom Helm, London Canberra. 280 pp.
NITZSCH, C.L. (1827): Cercaria. In ERSCH, J.C. & CRUBER, J.G. (eds.): Allgemeine Encyclopädie der Wissenschaften und Künste, pp.
66-69. Gleditsch. Leipzig.
NJINE, T. ( 1 977): Contribution a Ia connaissance des cilies du Cameroun: ecologie - cytologie I. Etude ecologique. - Annls Stn limnol. Bes-
se, 1l: l-55.
NOLAND, L.E. ( 1925): Factors influencing the distribution of fresh water ciliates. - Ecology, 6: 437452.
NOLAND, L.E. ( 1925a): A review of the genus Coleps with descriptions of two new species. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 44: 3- I 3.
NOLAND, L.E. & FINLEY, H.E. (1931): Studies on the taxonomy of the genus Vorticello. -Trans. Am. microsc. Soc.,50: 81 123.
NOLL, M. ( 1972): Besiedlungsfolgen in flußwasser-beschickten Grundwasser-Anreicherungsbecken. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 70: 355- 378.
NOSEK, J.N. & BERECZKY, M.Cs. ( l98l ): Untersuchungen der Bestandsstruktur des Ciliatenplanktons im Haupt- und in einem Nebenarm
der Donau mit Hilf'e der Produkt-Moment-Korrelations- und der Pfadanalyse. - Arch. Protistenk.,l24: 113-192.
NOSEK, J.N. & BERECZKY, M.Cs. ( 1994): The effect of some environmental fhctors on protozoa populations ol the RiverDarrr.rbe. - Ti-
scia, 28: 29-36.
NÖTHLICH, l. (1912): Trophische Struktur und Bioaktivität der Planktongesellschaft im Lrnteren limnischen Bereich des E,lbe-Aestuärs.
Kriterien zur saprobiellen Einstufung eines Tidengewässers. - Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl., 43: 33-ll'7.
NUSCH, E. (1969): Ökologische und systematische Untersuchung der Peritricha (Ciliata, Protozoa) im AufVuchs von Talsperren und Fluss-
stauen mit verschiedenem Saprobitätsgrad. Dissertation Universität Bonn.
NUSCH, E.A. (1970): Ökologische und systematische Untersuchungen der Peritricha (Protozoa, Ciliata) im AufVuchs von Talsperren und
Flußstauen mit verschiedenem Saprobitätsgrad (mit Modellversuchen). Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl., 37:243-386.
OBERTHÜR, K. (1937): Untersuchungen an Frontonia nnrinaFABRE-DOM. aus einer Binnenland-salzquelle unter besonderer Berück-
sichtigung der pulsierenden Vakuole. - Arch. Protistenk., 88: 387-420.
OBOLKINA, L.A. (1995): Ciliophora. In TIMOSHKIN, O.A. (ed.): Guide and key to pelagic animals of Baikal with ecological notes, pp.
182-250. Novosibirsk "Nauka" Siberian Publishing Firm RAS.
OBOLKINA, L.A. ( 1995a): New species of the family Colepidae (Prostomatida, Citiophora) fiom Lake Baikal. Zool. Zh.. 74: 3 19 (in
Russian with English summary).
ODERMATT, J.M. (1970): Limnologische Charakterisierung des Lauerzersees mit besonderer Berücksichtigung des Planktons. - Schweiz.
Z.Hydrol.,32:. l-15.
OKADA, T.A. ( 1956): Culture of Flr.»zlonia lcut us. -Zool. Mag., Tokyo, 65: 20'7-209 (in Japanese with English summary).
OKEN, L. (1815): Lehrbuch der Naturgeschichte. DritterTheil. Zoologie Erste Abth. Fleischlose Thiere. Schmid & Company, Jena, p.45.
OLEKSIV, I. (1985): Species composition and abundance of planktonic infusoria in ponds. - Gidrobiol. Zh..2l: U9-93 (in Russian with
English summary).
OLEKSIV, I.T. (1985a): Planktonnyie infuzorii prudov zapadnoj chast USSR (Planktonic infusoria ofponds in the western Ukraine, USSR).
Summary of the Doctoral Thesis. lnst. Hydrobiol., Kiev. 2l pp. (in Russian).
OLEKSIV, I.T. & YALYNSKA,YA, N.S. (1984): Succession in communities of plankton inf-usoria in ponds. ln: ANDRUSHAITIS, G.P.,
BOIKOVA, E.E. & LIEPA, R.A. (eds.): Ecology of marine and fiesh water protozoans (Proceedings of the first Syrnposium), pp. tt I 83.
Academy of Sciences of the Latvian SSR, Salaspils (in Russian).
OLEKSIV, I.T., LOPOTUN, A.G. & TKAÖC, I.M. (l9tt6): Ciliates as food in fish ponds "Lad'yinka" and the salinity of these ponds.
Vest. L'vov. Univ. (Ser. Geol.),9:28 34 (in Russian).
PACE, M.L. (1982): Planktonic ciliates: their distribution, abundance, and relationship to microbial resources in a monomictic lake. - Can. J.
Fish. aquat. Sci.,39: I 106-l I 16.
PACE, M.L. (1986): An empirical analysis of zooplankton community size structure across lake trophic gradients. Limnol. Oceanogr.,3l:
45 55.
PACE, M.L. & ORCUTT, J.D.JL. (1981): The relative impoftance of protozoans, rotifers, and clustaceans in a freshwater zooplankton com-
munity. - Limnol. Oceanogr., 26:822-830.
PACE, M.L. & VAQUE, D. (1994): The importance of Daphnia in determining mortality rates of protozoans and rotif'ers in lakes. Limnol.
Oceanogr., 39: 9U5-996.
PACE, M.L., MCMANUS, G.B. & FINDLAY, S.E.G. ( 1990): Planktonic community structure determines the fate of bacterial production in
a temperate lake. Limnol. Oceanogr., 35: 795-808
163

Literature
PACKROFF, G. (1992): Faunistic studies on ciliates of three Eifel maar lakes. - Arch. Hydrobiol. Beih. Ergebn. Limnol., 38:209-221.
PACKROFF, G. & WILBERT, N. (1991): Taxonomische Studien über die Ciliatenfauna (Protozoa, Ciliophora) der Eifelmaare. - Arch. Pro-
tistenk., 140: l2l-139.
PACKROFF, G. & ZWICK, P. (1996): The ciliate fauna of an unpolluted foothill stream, the Breitenbach, 1: Qualitative aspects. - Limnolo-
gica (Berlin), 26: 255-262.
PAI-KAO-TUNG (1962): Limnological survey of Wu-Li lake during 1951. - Acta hydrobiol. sin., 1: 93-108 (in Chinese with English sum-
mary).
PALLAS, P.S. (1766): Elenchus Zoophytorum. Petrum van Cleef, Hagae-Comitum.451 pp.
PÄRDUCZ, B. (1954): Täplälkozäsbiol6giai 6s sejttani vizsgälatok didiniumokon (Emährungsbiologische und zytologische Untersuchungen
an Didinien). - Biol. Kö21., 1: 57-68 (in Hungarian with Russian and German summary).
PÄRDUCZ, B. ( l96l ): Bewegungsbilder über Didinien. - Annls hist.- nat. Mus. natn. hung., 53: 261-280.
PATSCH, B. (1974): Die Aufwuchsciliaten des Naturlehrparks Haus Wildenrath. Monographische Bearbeitung der Morphologie und Ökolo-
gie. - Arb. Inst. landw. Zool. Bienenkd. ,l: l-82.
PATRICK, R. (1961): A study of the numbers and kinds of species found in rivers in Eastern United States. - Proc. Acad. nat. Sci. Philad.,
ll3:215-258.
PATRICK, R., CAIRNS, J.Jr. & ROBACK, S.S. (1967): An ecosystematic study of the fauna and flora of the Savannah River. - Proc. Acad.
nat. Sci. Philad., 118 (year 1966): 109401.
PATTERSON, D.J., LARSEN, J. & CORLISS, J.O. (1989): The ecology of heterotrophic flagellates and ciliates living in marine sediments.
- Progr. Protistol., 3: 185-277.
PEDROS-ALIÖ, C. & GUERRERO, R. (1993): Microbial ecology in Lake Cis6. In JONES, J.G. (ed.): Advances in microbial ecology, Vo-
lume 13, pp.155-2O9. Plenum Press, New York.
PEDRÖS-ALIÖ, C., MASSANA, R. & LATASA, M. (i995): Predation by ciliates on a metalimnetic Cryptomonas population: feeding
rates, impact and effects of vertical migration. - J. Plankton Res., 17: 213l-2154.
PEJLER, B. (1962): Notes on some limnoplanktic protozoans with description of two new species. - Zool. Bidr. Upps., 33:447452.
PEJLER, B. ( 1 964): Regional-ecological studies of Swedish fresh-water zooplankton. * Zool. Bidr. Upps., 36 (years 1963-1964): 407 -515.
PENARD, E. (1916): Le Strombidium mirabile. - M6m. Soc. Phys. Hist. nat. Genöve, 38:227-251.
PENARD, E. (1920): Observations sv le Strombidium viride STEIN. - Revue suisse Zool., 28: l-9.
PENARD, E. (1922): Etudes sur les infusoires d'eau douce. Georg & Ci", Genöve. 33 t pp.
PEREZ REYES, R. & SALAS GOMIF,Z, E. (1961): Protozoarios encontrados en colecciones de agua del Valle de M6xico. - An. Esc. nac.
Cienc. biol., M6x.,l0: 3944.
PERRISS, S.J. & LAYBOURN-PARRY, l. (1997): Microbial communities in saline lakes of the Vestfold Hills (eastern Antarctica). - Polar
Biol.,18: 135-144.
PERRISS, S.J., LAYBOURN-PARRY, J. & MARCHANT, H.J. (1993): Mesodinium rubrum (Myrionecta rubra) in an Antarctic brackish
lake. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 128:57-64.
PERRISS, S.J., LAYBOURN-PARRY, J. & JONES, R.I. (1994): Chlorophyll contents and photosynthetic rates of the freshwater mixo-
trophic ciliate Strombidium viride (Clliophora: Oligotrichida). - Arch. Hydrobiol., 130: 473483.
PERRISS, S.J., LAYBOURN-PARRY, J. & MARCHANT, H.J. (1995): Widespread occurrence of populations of the unique autotrophic ci-
liate Mesodinium rubrum (Clliophora: Haptorida) in brackish and saline lakes ofthe Vestfold Hills (eastern Antarctica). - Polar Biol.,
15:423428.
PERTY, M. (1852): Zur Kenntniss kleinster Lebensformen nach Bau, Funktionen, Systematik, mit Specialverzeichniss der in der Schweiz
beobachteten. Jent & Reinert, Bem.228 pp.
PETKOVIÖ, S.R. (1979): Sastav i karakter zooplanktona Bukumirskog jezera - Prilog poznavanju zooplanktonskih zajednica u planinskim
glacijalnim jezerima Cme Gore (Composition and character of zooplankton in Bukumirsko Lake - The contribution to the knowledge of
zooplankton communities of mountainous glacial lakes in Cma Gora (Montenegro) - Yugoslavia)). - Poljoprivreda i Sumarstvo, 25:
3-21 (in Serbocoration with English summary).
PETKOVIÖ, S. & PETKOVIÖ, S. 1teZSl: Struktura i karakter planktona §askog jezera. Novi prilog poznavanju limnoflore i faune brakiönih
voda u karstu Jugoslavije (Structure and character of plankton in §asko Lake. New contribution to the knowledge of limnoflora and fau-
na of brackish waters in karst of Yugoslavia). - Poljoprivreda, 24:45-66 (in Serbocroatian with English summary).
PETKOVIÖ, S. & PETKOVIÖ, S. (tgS+): Limnoflora i limnofauna reke moraöe i nekih reka u njenom slivu (Limnoflora and limnofauna of
the River Moraöa and some rivers in its drainage system). - Glasnik Republickog Zavoda za Za§titu Prirode i Prirodnjaökog Muzeja Ti-
tograd, t7: 47-68 (ir Serbo-Croatian with English summary).
PETROVA, M.A. & SMIRNOVA, T.P. (1974): Ecology of planktonic infusoria in a secondary oligotrophic lake. - Hydrobiol.I.,l0: 17-21.
PETROVA, M.A., SMIRNOVA, T.P., AGEYEVA, T.A. & KHALTURINA, G.V. (1976): Planktonic infusorians in two lakes in Gor'kiy
province. - Hydrobiol. J., L2: 22-27 .
PEW, W. & FOISSNER, W. (1992): Morphology and morphogenesis of Strobilidium caudatum (FROMENTEL), Meseres corllssi n. sp.,
Halteria grandinella (MÜLLER). and Strombidium rehwaldi n. sp., and a proposed phylogenetic system for oligotrich ciliates
(Protozoa, Ciliophora). - J. Protozool., 39: 159-176.
PETZ,W. & FOISSNER, W. (1993): Morphogenesis in some freshwater tintinnids (Ciliophora, Oligotrichida). - Europ. J. Protistol.,29:
106-120.
PETZ, W., SONG, W. & WILBERT, N. (1995): Taxonomy and ecology of the ciliate fauna (Protozoa, Ciliophora) in the endopagial and pe-
lagial of the Weddelt Sea, Antarctica. - Stapfia, 40: 1-223.
PFANNKUCHE, O., JELINEK, H. & HARTWIG, E. (1975): Zur Fauna eines Süßwasserwattes im Elbe-Aestuar. * Arch. Hydrobiol., 76:
475498.
764

Literature
PIERCE, R.W. (1995): Sinking rates of tintinnid loricae: ecological and evolutionary implications. - J. Euk. Microbiol. Suppl., 42: 404, Ab-
stract 221.
PINTO, C. (1925): Protozoarios observados no Brasil. - Mems Inst. Oswaldo Cruz, 18: 2ll-301.
POILVERT, A. (1959): Regime v6g6tarien et pr6ferences alimentaires des cili6s de la famille des Nassulidae. - J. Protozool., 6: 30, Abstract
I 18.
POLLINGHER, U. & KIMOR, B. (1967): The tintinnid fauna of lake Tiberias. - Bull.Sea Fish. Res. Stn lsrael,44: l'7-21.
PORTER, K.G., PACE, M.L. & BATTEY, J.F. (1979): Ciliate protozoans as links in freshwater planktonic food chains. - Nature, 277:
563-565.
PORTER, K.G., SHERR, E.B., SHERR, 8.F., PACE, M. & SANDERS, R.W. (1985): Protozoa in planktonic food webs. J. Protozool.,32:
409415.
POURRIOT, R., GARNIER, J. & ROUGIER, C. (1991): Relations entre les tintinnides et quelques variables biotiques et abiotiques d'un
Lac de Gravidre. - Arch. Protistenk., 140:335-344.
PRATT, J.R. & ROSEN, B.H. (1983): Associations of species of Vorticella (Peritrichida) and planktonic algae. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc.,
102:48-54.
PRATT, J.R., CAIRNS, J.Jr. & MEIER, K. (1985): Migration of species during early colonization. - Am. Midl. Nat., 113: 92-101.
PRATT, J.R., LANG, 8.2., KAESLER, R.L. & CAIRNS, J.Jr. ( 1986): Effect of seasonal changes on protozoans inhabiting artificial substra-
tes in a small pond. - Arch. Protistenk., l3l: 45-51.
PRECHT, H. (1935): Epizoen der Kieler Bucht. - Nova Acta Leopoldina, 3:405474.
PRIMC, B. (1986): Vertical distribution of Tintinnopsis lacustris (ENTZ) and Tintinnidium.fluviatrlr STEIN (Citiata) in Lake Kozjak (Plir
vice Lakes), Yugoslavia. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., 7l: 119-185.
PRIMC, B. (1988): Trophic relationships ofciliated protozoa developed under different saprobic conditions in the periphyton ofthe Sava Ri-
ver. - Biol. Glasn., 90: 349-353.
PRIMC-HABDIJA, B., HABDIJA, I., MESTROV, M. & RADANOVIÖ, L (1996): Composition of ciliate fauna and its seasonal changes in
fluvial drift. - Aquatic Sciences, 58:224-24O.
PROKESOVÄ, V. (1959): Hydrobiological research of two naturally polluted pools in the woody inundation area of the Elbe. - Vest. cs[.
zool. Spol., 23:34-69.
PROPER, G. & GARVER, J.C. (1966): Mass culture of the protozoa Colpoda.rleimil. - Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 8:287-296.
PROWAZEK, S.von (1910): Contribuigäo para o conhecimento da fauna de protozoarios do Brazil (Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Protozoenfau-
na Brasiliens). - Mems Inst. Oswaldo Cruz,2: 149-158.
PRZYBOS, E. (1996): Further investigations on the zooplankton in the Tatras. - Folia biol., Krak6w, 44 31 34.
PRZYBOS, E. & FOKIN, S. (1997): Species of the Paramecium aurelia complex SONNEBORN in Germany. - Arch. Protistenk., 148:
167-172.
PRZYBOS, E. & KOMALA , Z. (1995): Investigations on the zooplankton in the Tatras. - Folia biol., Krak6w, 43: 2l-24.
PSENNER, R. & SCHLOTT-IDL, K. (1985): Trophic relationships between bacteria and protozoa in the hypolimnion of a meromictic meso-
trophic lake. Hydrobiologia, l2l: ll1-120.
PUJIN, V. ( 1994): Aktuetler Stand der Wassergüte des jugoslawischen Donau-Abschnitts aus hydrobiologischer Sicht. - Limnologie aktuell,
2:3547.
PUJIN, V., RATAJAC, R. & DJUKIÖ, N. (1984): Zusammensetzung und Dynamik des Zooplanktons und der Bodenfauna des unteren
Theisslaufs. - Tiscia (Szeged), 19:'79-87 .
PUYTORAC, P.DE, MIGNOT, J.P., GRAIN, J., GROLIERE, C.A., BONNET, L. & COUILLARD, P. (1972): Premier relev6 de cerrains
groupes de protozoaires libres sur le territoire de la station de biologie de l'universitd de Montr6al (Saint-Hippolyte, Comtd de Terrebon-
ne, Qu6bec). - Naturaliste can.,99:417440.
QUIRMBACH, J. (1912): Studien über das Plankton des Dortmund- Emskanals und der Werse bei Münster i. W. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 7:
409414.
RAABE, Z. (1959): Trichodina pedicrlas (O. F. MÜLLER, 1786) EHRENBERG, 1838 etTrichodina donterguei (WALLENCREN, 1897).
- Acta parasit. pol.,7: 189 202.
RAI, H. ( 1974): Limnological studies on the River Yamuna at Delhi, India Part IL The dynamics of potamoplankton populations in the River
Yamuna. - Arch. Hydrobiol.,73: 492 511.
RAO, G.C. & GANAPATI, P.N. (1968): The interstitial fauna inhabiting the beach sands of Waltair Coast. - Proc. natn. Inst. Sci. India, Ser.
B (Biological sciences), 34: 82-125.
RECK, E.M. (1987): ZurÖkologie derpelagischen Ciliaten des Plußsees. Dissertation Christian-Albrechts-Universität Kiel.288 pp.
RECK, E.M. (1988): Lorica-splitting by the Tintinnina. An adaptive strategy to invade freshwater ecosystems? - Naturwissenschaften, 75:
4547.
REDEKE, H.C. (1948): Hydrobiologie van Nederland. De zoete wateren. Uitgeverij & De Boer, Amsterdam.
REINNARTH, G. (1979): Ökologie und Vertikalverteilung von Ciliaten in der Schlamm-Wasser-Kontaktzone verschiedener Süsswasserbio-
tope. Dissertation Universität Bonn. I l4 pp.
REISSER, W. (1986): Endosymbiotic associations of freshwater protozoa and algae. - Progr. Protistol., l: 195214.
REUKAUF, E. (1930): Zur Biologie von Didinium nosutum STEIN. - Z. vergl. Physiol., 2:689J01.
REUTER, J. (1961): Einige faunistische und ökologische Beobachtungen über Felsentümpel-Ziliaten. - Acta zool. fenn.,99: 142.
RIDDLE, L.C. (1905): Brush Lake protozoa. - Ohio Nat., 6:394-395.
RIEDEL-LORJE, J.C. (1981): Untersuchungen über den Indikationswert von Aufwuchs in Süß- und Brackwasserzonen des Elbe-Aestuars
unter Berücksichtigung industrieller Einleitungen. - Arch. Hydrobiol., Suppl. 61: 153-226.
t65

Literature
RIEDER, N. (1971): Elektronenoptische Untersuchungenan DidiniLrnl nasutum O. F. MÜLLER lCitiata, Cyrnnostomata) in lnterphase und
Teilung. - Forma et functio, 4: 46-86.
RIEDER, N. (1973): Elektronenoptische und histochemische Untersuchungen an der Cystenhülle von Ditliniunt nasutun O. F. MÜLLER
(Ciliata, Holotricha). - Arch. Protistenk., 115: 125-131.
RIEMANN,8., HAVSKUM, H., THINGSTAD, F. & BERNARD, C. (1995): The role of mixotrophy in pelagic environments. In JOINT, I.
(ed.): Molecularecology of aquatic microbes (NATO ASI Series, Vol. G 38), pp.81-114. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
RIGGENBACH, E. (1922): Beiträge zur Faunistik, Biologie und Oekologie der Heliozoen u. Ciliaten von Basel und Umgebung. Dissertati-
on Universität Basel. 82 pp.
RIVERA, F., SANCHEZ, M.R., LUGO,4., RAMIREZ, P., ORTIZ, R. & CALDERON, A. (1987): Ciliates in a waste stabilization pond sy-
stem in Mexico. - Water, Air, Soil Pollution, 34:245-262.
ROBERTS, D.M. & CAUSTON, H. ( 1988): Silver nitrate impregnation of ciliated protozoa. Arch. Protistenk ., 135: 299-318.
ROGERSON, 4., FINLAY, B.J. & BERNINGER, U.-G. (1989): Sequestered chloroplasts in the freshwater ciliate Strombidiunt riride (Ci-
liophora: Oligotrichida). - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 108: lll-126.
ROQUE, M. (1961): Recherches sur les infusoires cili6s: les hym6nostomes p6niculiens. - Bull. biol. Fr. Belg.,95: 431-519.
ROQUE, M. & PUYTORAC, P.DE (1972): Frontonia canadensis sp. nov. (Cili6 hym6nostome p6niculien). - Naturaliste can.,99: 4ll-
416.
ROSSOLIMO, L.L. (1923): Zw Protozoenf auna des Baikalsees. - Russk. gidrobiol. Zh.,2:14-82 (in Russian with German summary).
ROSSOLIMO, L.L. (1927): Planktische Infusorien des Karischen Meeres. Trudy morsk. nauch. Inst., 2: 63 l1 (in Russian with German
summary).
ROUSSELET, C. (1890): On"Antphilepnrs.flagellatus," sp. n. A new infusorian. J. Quekett microsc. Club,4: I l4-l 15.
ROUX, J. (1899): Observations sur quelques infusoires cili6s des environs de Genöve avec la description de nouvelles espdces. - Revue
suisse Zool.. 6:557 636.
ROUX, J. (1900): Note sur les infusoires cili6s du Lac L6man. - Revue suisse Zool., 8:459465.
ROUX, J. (1901): Faune inlusorienne des eaux stagnantes des environs de Genöve. - M6m. Inst. natn. g6nev., 19: l-149.
RUBLEE, P.A. & BETTEZ, N. (199-5): Change of microplankton community structure in response to fertilization of an arctic lake. - Hydro-
biologia, 312: 183-190.
RUlZ,A.(1961):CiliadosdevidalibredelaciudadUniversitaria,CostaRica. RevtaBiol.trop.,9:209 214.
RUSEV, B.K., JANEVA, I.J. & DETCHEVA, R.B. ( 1988): Trends in the changes of the saprobiological condition of the river Beli, Lom and
structural characteristics of its benthic zoocoenoses during the 1982-1984 period. - Hydrobiology, 32: 3143 (in Russiar.r with English
summary).
RUTHVEN, l.A. (1972): Protozoan studies. - Bulletin. Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. Water Resources Research Cen-
ter (Blacksburg), 54: 3143.
RUTTNER, F. (1937): Limnologische Studien an einigen Seen der Ostalpen. (Seen des Salzkammergutes, des Ötscher- und Hochschwabge-
bietes.). - Arch. Hydrobiol.,32: 161-319.
RUTTNER, F. (1952): Planktonstudien der Deutschen Limnologischen Sunda-Expedition. Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl., 2l: l-214.
RYLOV, W.M. (1924): Zur Biologie des seltenen planktonischen Infusoriums Epistylis rotans SYEC. - lnt. Revue ges. Hydrobiol.
Hydrogr.. 12:218 221.
SAKOWSKY-CAMPIONI, F. (1906): Verzeichnis der Infusorien der Umgebung von Bern. - Mitt. naturf. Ges. Bern, year 1906: 135-131 .
SALBRECHTER, M. & ARNDT, H. (1994): The annual cycle of protozooplankton in the alpine, mesotrophic Lake Mondsee (Austria). -
Marine Microbial Food Webs, 8:217-234.
SALT, G.W. (1974): Predator and prey densities as controls of the rate of capture by the predator Ditliniunt nosLrtum. - Ecology, 55:
434439.
SALT, G.W. (1975): Changes in the cell volume of Dirlulilrnl nosutltm during population increase. -J. Protozool.,22: ll2-115.
SALT, G.W. ( 1979): Density, starvation, and swimming rale \n Didirtiunt populations. - Am. Nat., 113: 135- 143.
SALVADO, H. & GRACIA, M.P. (1991): Response of ciliate populations to changing environmental conditions along a fieshwater
reservoir. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 123: 239-255.
SALVADÖ CABR6,, H. (1993): Anälisis de la estructura de las comunidades de protozoos ciliados a trav6s del gradiente trdfico en un em-
balse de Barcelona (Espana). - Boln R. Soc. esp. Hist. nat., 90: 17-28.
SAMANO, A.B. & SOKOLOFF, D. (1931): La flora y fäuna microscopicas de aguas dulces del Valle de Mexico. - Monografias Inst. Biol.
Univ. nac. M6x., l: l-49.
SAMPL, J. (1967): Vergleichende limnologische Untersuchungen an zwei benachbarten Ostalpenseen, dem Erlaufsee und dem Lunzer Un-
tersee. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 63: 533-556.
SANDHALL, A. A eBnCCnEN, H. (1985): Planktonkunde. Bilder aus der Mikrowelt von Teich und See. Franckh'sche Verlagshandlung,
Stuttgart. 107 pp.
SAND-JENSEN, K., CEERTZ-HANSEN, O., PEDERSEN, O. & NIELSEN, H.S. (1994): Size dependence of composition, photosynthesis
and growth in the colony-forming freshwater ciliate, Ophrydiunt versatile. - Freshwat. Biol., 31: l2l-130.
SAND-JENSEN, K., PEDERSEN, O. & GEERTZ-HANSEN, O. (1997): Regulation and role of photosynthesis in the colonial symbiotic ci-
liate Ophrydium versatile. - Limnol. Oceanogr., 42:866-8'73.
SANDERS, R.W. ( 1991): Mixotrophic protists in marine and freshwater ecosystems. - J. Protozool., 38: 76-81 .
SANDERS, R.W., PORTER, K.G., BENNETT, S.J. & DEBIASE, A.E. (1989): Seasonal pattems of bacterivory by flagellates, ciliates, roti-
fers, and cladocerans in a freshwater planktonic community. - Limnol. Oceanogr., 34: 613-681.
SANTA ROSA, M.R. De (1984): Algumas observaEöes ultra-estruturais de alteraEöes, ap6s jejum prolongado, em Monotliniunr halbiani
(FABRE-DOMERGUE, 1888). Ciliata, Gymnostomatida, Rhabdophorina, Didiniidae. - Revta bras. Biot., 44: 489491 .
SANTANGELO, G. & LUCCHESI, P. ( 1995): Spatial distribution pattern of ciliated protozoa in 4 Mediterranean interstitial environment. -
Adv. microb. E col., 9: 47 -54.
766

Literature
SARMIENTO, L. & GUERRA, H. (1960): Protozoarios de las aguas de Villa, con la descripcion de tres nuevas especies. - Publnes Mus.
Hist. nat., Lima, Ser. A. Zoologia, 19: l-25.
SAROJINI, R. & NAGABHUSHANAM, R. (1966): The oxygen consumption of the ciliate, Coleps hirtus. - Broteria, 56r. Cienc. nat.,35:
45-55.
SAROJINI, R. & NAGABHUSHANAM, R. ( 1967): A comparative study of the respiration of some free-living ciliate protozoa. - J. Anim.
Morph. Physiol., 14: 158-161.
SASSUCHIN, D. (1924): Beobachtungen über die Protozoenfauna der Oka. - Rab. oksk. biol. Sta. Murome (Nizhni-Novg.), 3: 46-52 (in
Russian with German summary).
SCHARF, R. (1961): Die Ciliaten der Kühltürme und Brauchwasserzuflüsse eines rnitteldeutschen Braunkohlenkombinates. - Wiss. Z. Karl-
Marx-Univ. Lpz., Mathematisch-Naturwissenschaftliche Reihe, 10: 38 l-395.
SCHERB, K. (1968): Zur Biologie des belebten Schlammes. - Münchn. Beitr. Abwass.- Fisch.- Flussbiol.,5: 158-205.
SCHEWIAKOFF, W. ( I 889): Beiträge zur Kenntniss der holotrichen Ciliaten. - Biblthca Zool. , l: lJ7 .
SCHEWIAKOFF, W. (1892): Ueber die geographische Verbreitung der Süsswasser-Protozoön. - Verh. naturh.-med. Ver. Heidelb. (N. S.),
4:544-561.
SCHEWIAKOFF, W. (1893): Über die geographische Verbreitung der Süsswasser-Protozoön. -Zap. imp. Akad. Nauk, 7" S6rie,41:
t- 20t.
SCHEWIAKOFF, W. (1896): The organization and systematics of the infusoria Aspirotricha (Holotricha auctorum). - Zap. imp. Akad.
Nauk,4: I 395 (in Russian).
SCHLENKER,G.(1912):Ophrydiuntversotile O.F.Müll.-Mikrokosmos,5: l8-19.
SCHLOTT-IDL, K. (1978): Populationsdynamik pelagischer Protozoen des Piburger Sees lTirol, Österreich;. Dissertation Universität Inns-
bruck. 82 pp.
SCHLOTT-IDL, K. (1984): Qualitative und quantitative Untersuchungen der pelagischen Ciliaten des Piburger Sees lTirol, Österreich).
Limnologica (Berlin), l5:.43 54.
SCHLOTT-IDL, K. (1984a): Die räumliche und zeitliche Verteilung der pelagischen Ciliaten im Lunzer Untersee 1981182. - Arch. Hydro-
biol., 101:219-281.
SCHLOTT-IDL, K. (1986): Ecology of pelagic ciliates in some fishponds of the northern Waldviertel. - Symposia Biologica Hungalica, 33:
243-247.
SCHLOTT-IDL, K. (1991): Zusammenhänge zwischen Copepoden und Ciliaten im Plankton von Fischzuchtteichen. ln DEUTSCHE, GE-
SELLSCHAFT FÜR LIMNOLOGIE E. V. (ed.): Erweiterte Zusammenfassungen der Jahrestagung 199 I 30.9. 6. 10. I 99 I 'in Monclsee,
pp. 401-403. Dissertations- und Fotodruck Frank GmbH, München.
SCHMERENBECK, W. (1975): Experimentelle Untersuchungen an strömenden Modellgewässern zur Frage der Beziehung zwischen dem
Abbau organischer Substanz und der Ciliatenbesiedlung. Arb. Inst. landw. Zool. Bienenkd., 2: I 95.
SCHMIDT, H. (1913): Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Mastigophoren und Ciliaten der Umgegend von Bonn. - Sber. naturh. Ver. preuss. Rheinl.
Westf.. year 19l3: 73-83.
SCHMIDT, H. (1916): Beitrag zur Protozoenfauna der Rheinprovinz und Westfalens. - Verh. naturh. Ver. preuss. Rheinl., 72 (year l9l5):
59-95.
SCHMIDT, W.J. (1920): Bau und Lebenserscheinungen zweier neuer Ciliaten. - Sber. naturh. Ver. preuss. Rheinl. Westf., years 1917-1919:
t2-t4.
SCHMIDT, W.J. (1921): Untersuchungen über Bau und Lebenserscheinungen von Bursello spumosa, einem neuen Ciliaten. Arch.
mikrosk. Anat. EntwMech., 95: l-36.
SCHMITZ, M.M. (1986): Ökologische und systematische Untersuchungen an Ciliaten (Protozoa, Ciliophora) im oberen Niederrhein. Disser-
tation Universitäl Bonn. 246 pp & 149 pp Anhang.
SCHNEIDER, G. (1909): Der Obersee bei Reval. - Arch. Biontol., 2 (years 1908-1909): l-192.
SCHNEIDER, H. (19'72): Eine aufwuchsbildende Wimpertierkolonie: Ophrycliunt vcrsatile. - Mikrokosmos, 61: 356-35t1.
SCHNEIDER, H. ( 1980): Die Kleinlebewelt eines Parkteiches. - Mikrokosmos, 69: 4G-49.
SCHNEIDER, H. (1985): Die Polypenlaus Kerono polyprum auf dem Grünen Süfiwasserpolypen! - Mikrokosmos,T4:313-316.
SCHNEIDER,H.(1990):EinreizvollesStudienobjekt: DiePolypenlausTrichodinapcdicula.s.-Mikrokosmos,T9: l4'1-156.
SCHNEIDER, H. (1991): Stentor anlethJslirrrl.s - ein Trompetentier im Plankton. - Mikrokosmos, S0: 193-199.
SCHNEIDER, H. (1998): Trompetentiere (Stentoren) aus pfälzischen Gewässern. - Mikrokosmos,ST: 13-20.
SCHNEIDER, W. ( 1930): Die Verbreitung des Tektins bei den Ciliaten. - Arch. Protistenk.,T2:482-531 .
SCHÖDEL, H. (1987): Seßhafie Wimpertiere (Peritricha, Chonotricha, Suctoria) auf Asellus acluatit'Lts und Gammariden. - Lirnnologica
(Berlin), 18: 83- I 66.
SCHÖNBERGER, M. (1994): Planktonic ciliated protozoa of Neusiedler See (Austria/Hungary) - a comparison between the turbid open la-
ke and a reedless brown-water pond. - Marine Microbial Food Webs, 8:.251-263.
SCHÖNBERGER, M. (1994a): Planktische Ciliaten, Rotatorien und Crustaceen in unterschiedlichen Lebensräumen des Neusiedler Sees -
saisonale Sukzession und ökologische Aspekte. - Deutsche Ges. Limnologie Erweiterte Zusammenfassung. 5 pages.
SCHÖNBORN, W. (1985): Protozoa. In CASPER, S.J. (ed.): Lake Stechlin. A temperate otigotrophic lake, pp.500-504. Junk Publishers,
Dordrecht, Boston, Lancaster.
SCHÖNBORN, W. (1990): Analyse subfossiler Protozoenschalen der Sedimente eines kleinen sauren Waldsees (Kleiner Barsch-See, nördli-
che DDR). - Limnologica (Berlin), 2l: l3l 145.
SCHOUTEDEN, H. (1906): Les infusoires aspirotriches d'eau douce. - Annls Biol. lacustre, 1: 383-468.
SCHULZ, H. (1961): Qualitative und quantitative Planktonuntersuchungen im Elbe-Aestuar. - Arch. Hydrobiol., Suppl. 2611: 5-105.
SCHULZ, H. ( 1965): Die Tintinnoinea des Elbe-Aestuars. - Arch. FischWiss., 15:216-225.
SCHULZE, K.A. ( 195 I ): Experimentelle Untersuchungen über die Chlorellen-Symbiose bei Ciliaten. - Biol. Gen., 19: 281-298.
767

Literature
SCHWARTZ, V. (1965): Einleitende Beobachtungen am Beutefang vonDidinium nasutum. -2. Naturf.,20b: 383-391.
SCHWARZ, S. (1962): hoduktionsbiologische Untersuchungen am Zooplankton der Rügenschen, Hiddenseer und Darßer Boddengewässer
(1953 bis 1955). -2. Fisch. (N.F.), l0:401428.
SCHWEIZER, A. (1994): Seasonal dynamics of planktonic Ciliophora along a depth transect in Lake Constance. - Marine Microbial Food
Webs,8: 283-293.
SCHWOERBEL, J. (1980): Einführung in die Limnologie. 4th ed. Fischer, Stuttgart New York. 196 pp.
SCORZA, J.V. & NÜNEZ MONTIEL, B.O. (1954): Estudio experimental sobre la sucesion de protozoarios que se desarrolla en las infusio-
nes de musgo y de las variaciones de pH. que la acompaflan. - Acta biol. venez., 1: 213-230.
SEBESTYEN, O. (1958): Quantitative plankton studies on lake Balaton IX. A summary of the biomass studies. -Annls Inst. biol. Tihany,
25:281-292.
SEBESTYEN, O., TÖRÖK, P. & VARGA, L. (1951): Mennyisdgi planktontanulmänyok a balatonon (Quantitave plankton studies in lake
Balaton). - Annls Inst. biol. Tihany, 20:69-125 (in Hungarian with English summary).
SECKT, H. (1924): Estudios hidrobiologicos en lä Argentina. Contribucidn al conocimiento de los microorganismos del agua dulce y de sus
condiciones vitales. - Revta Univ. nac. C6rdoba, 11: 55-1 10.
SELIN, P. & KOSKINEN, K. (1988): The sedimentation ponds as the water ffeatment system in the peat production areas and their effect on
the water quality and plankton communities. - Verh. int. Verein. theor. angew. Limnol., 23: 1564-1571 .
SERAVIN, L.N. & ORLOVSKAJA, E.E. (1977): Feeding behaviour of unicellular animals. I. The main role of chemoreception in the food
choice of camivorous protozoa. - Acta Protozool., 16: 309-332.
SERNOV, S.A. (1929): Über die Überwinterung der Wasserorganismen im Eise und in der gefrorenen Erde nach dem Material von N.
Boldyreva, P. P. Scharmina und J. D. Schmeleva. [Über das Pagon (Pagon, ein neuer Terminus)]. - Verh. int. Verein. theor. angew.
Limnol., 4:555-563.
SHAWHAN, F.M., JOHNSON, L.P. & JAHN, T.L. (1947): Protozoa of Iowa. - Proc. Iowa Acad. Sci., 54: 353-367 .
SHCHERBAKOV, A.D. ( 1969): Quantity and biomass of protozoa in the plankton of a eutrophic lake. * Hydrobiol. J., 5: 9-15.
SHEN, Y. (1980): Ecological studies on the periphytic protozoa in Lake Dong Hu, Wuhan. - Acta hydrobiol. sin., 7: l9-40 (in Chinese with
English summary).
SHEN, Y.-F. (1983): Protozoa of the Tibetan Plateau. In CHIANG, S.- C., SHEN, Y.-F. & GONG, X.-J. (eds.): Aquatic invertebrates of the
Tibetan Plateau, pp. 39-334. Academia Sinica Press, Peking.
SHEN, Y. & GU, M. (1965): Preliminary study of protozoa ecology in Donghu Lake, Wuchang. - Acta hydrobiol. sin., 5: 146-l8l (in Chi-
nese).
SHEN, Y. & JIANG, X. ( 1979): Evaluation of the self-purification effects of water bodies through zooplankton. - Oceanologia Limnol. sin.,
10: 161-173 (in Chinese with English summary).
SHERR, E.B. & SHERR, B.F. (1987): High rates of consumption of bacteria by pelagic ciliates. - Nature, 325:7lO-7ll.
SHERR, E.B., SHERR, B.F., BERMAN, T. & HADAS, O. (1991): High abundance of picoplankton-ingesting ciliates during late fall in La-
ke Kinneret, Israel. - J. Plankton Res., 13: 789J99.
SICK, F. (1933): Die Fauna der Meeresstrandtümpel des Bottsandes (Kieler Bucht). Ein Beitrag zur Ökologie und Faunistik von Brackwas-
sergebieten. - Z. wiss. Zool.,2 (B): 54-96.
SIEMENS MA, F. J. ( 1 99 1 ) : Heliozoea. - Protozoenfaun a, 2 : l-XI, 17 1 - 297 .
SIugr, K., BoBKoVÄ, J., MACEK, M., NEDOMA, J. & PSENNEi, R. (1995): Ciliate grazing on picoplankton in a eutrophic reservoir
during the summer phytoplankton maximum: a study at the species and community level. - Limnol. Oceanogr.,40: 1077-1090.
§nraBr, K., MACEK, M., PERNTHALER, J., STRASKRABOVÄ, v. & PSENNER, R. (1996): can freshwarer planktonic ciliates survive
on a diet of picoplankton? - J. Plankton Res., 18: 597-613.
§IUBK, K., VRBA, J., PERNTHALER, J., POSCH, T., HARTMAN, P., NEDOMA, J. & PSENNER, R. (1997): Morphological and compo-
sitional shifts in an experimental bacterial community influencbd by protists with contrasting feeding modes. - Appl. Environ.
Microbiol., 63: 587-595.
SIulgr, K., ARMENGOL, J., CoMERMA, M., GARCIA, J.-c., cHRZANowsKr, T.H., MACEK, M., NEDoMA, J. & sTRASKRA-
BOVÄ, V. (1998): Characteristics of protistan control of bacterial production in three reservoirs of different trophy. * Int. Revue ges.
Hydrobiol. Hydrogr., in press.
SIME NGANDO, T. & GROLIERE, C.A. (1991): Effets quantitatifs des fixateurs sur la conservation des cili6s planctoniques d'eau douce. -
Arch. Proristenk., 140: 109-120.
SIME-NGANDO, T. & HARTMANN, H.J. ( 1991): Short+erm variations of the abundance and biomass of planktonic ciliates in a eutrophic
lake. - Europ. J. Protistol., 27:249-263.
SIME-NGANDO, T., HARTMANN, H.J. & GROLIERE, C.A. (1990): Rapid quantification of planktonic ciliates: comparison of improved
live counting with other methods. - Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 56:2234-2242.
SINGH, B.N. (1941): The influence of different bacterial food supplies on the rate of reproduction in Colpoda steinii, and the factors influ-
encing encystation. - Ann. appl. Biol., 28:65-73.
SKIBBE, O. (1991): Der Einfluß der Herbstzirkulation auf die Populationsentwicklung und Vertikalverteilung der Ciliaten im Freiwasser
des Heiligensees. Diplomarbeit Universität Berlin. 61 pp.
SKIBBE, O. (1994): An improved quantitative protargol stain for ciliates and other planktonic protists. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 130: 339-347.
SKOGSTAD, 4., GRANSKOG, L. & KLAVENESS, D. (1987): Growth of freshwater ciliates offered planktonic algae as food. - J. Plank-
ton Res., 9: 503-5 I 2.
SKORIKOW, A.S. (1902): Die Erforschung des Potamoplanktons in Russland. - Biol. Zbl.,22:551-570.
SKORIKOW, A.S. (1905): Beobachtungen über das Plankton der Newa. - Biol. Zbl., 25:5-19.
SLÄDEÖEK, V. (1964): Bemerkung zt Amphileptus trachelioides (ZACHARIAS). - Sb. vys. Sk. chem.-techn ol. Praze,S: 523-528.
SLÄDEÖEK, V. (1969): The indicator value of some free-moving ciliates. - Arch. Protistenk., lll:276-278.
768

Literature
SLÄDEÖEK, Y . (1972): A note on the ciliate A.rtylo zoon faurei KAHL. - Vest. csl. Spol. zool.,36 '73-74.
SLÄDEÖEK, V. & SLÄDEÖKOVÄ, A. (1962): The plankton community of the Hamry and Sec reservoirs after the spring overtum. - Sb.
vys. Sk. chem.-technol. Praze, 6:389405.
SLÄDEÖEK, V. & SLÄDEÖKOVÄ, A. (1997): Planktonni koloniälni Peritrichia. - Sbomik I l. Limnolog. konf., Doubi u Trebobe, year
1997: 169-l'7 I (in Czech).
SLÄDEÖEK, V., ZELINKA, M., ROTHSCHEIN, J. & MoRAVCOVÄ, V. (1981): Biologickj'rozbor povrchov6 vody. Komentäf k CSN 83
0532 - öästi 6: Stanoveni saprobnfho indexu. Vydalo Vydavatelstvi Üiadu pro normalizaci a möieni, Praha. 186 pp. (in Czech).
SLÄDEÖKOVÄ, A. & SLÄDEÖEK, V. (1960): Jarni plankton nökolika ridolnich n\drZive vychodnich öechäch (Das Frühlingsplankton ei-
niger Talsperren in Ostböhmen). - Sb. vys. Sk. chem.-techn ol. Praze, 4: 481-510 (in Czech with Russian and English summary).
SMALL, E.B. & LYNN, D.H. ( l98l): A new macrosystem for the phylum Ciliophora DOFLEIN, 1901. BioSystems, 14:381401.
SMALL, E.B. & LYNN, D.H. (1985): Phylum Ciliophora DOFLEIN, 1901. In LEE, J.J., HUTNER, S.H. & BOVEE, E.C. (eds.): An illu-
strated guide to the protozoa, pp. 393-575. Society of Protozoologists, Lawrence.
SMALL, E.8., MARSZALEK, D.S. & ANTIPA, G.A. (1971): A survey of ciliate surface patterns and organelles as revealed with scanning
electron microscopy. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 90: 283-294.
SMIRNOVA, T.S. (1987): On the plankton infusoria of the Ladoga Lake. - Trudy zool. Inst., Leningr., 172:. 126-133 (in Russian with Eng-
lish summary).
SMITH, H.G. (1973): The Signy Island terrestrial reference sites: II. The protozoa. - Br. Antarct. Surv. Bull., No.33 & 34:83-87.
SMITH, I.F. (1914): A preliminary report on the infusoria of Kansas. - Kans. Univ. Sci. Bull., 9: 147-114.
SMITH, J.C. (1904): A preliminary contribution to the protozoan fauna of the Gulf Biologic Station with notes on some rare species. - Rep.
Lousiana Gulf Biologic Station for 1903, 2 (year 1904): 4347 .
SOKOLOFF, D. (1931): Un nuevo infusorio ciliado de agua dulce. Nota preliminar. - An. Inst. Biol. Univ. Nldx.,2: 165-166.
SOLA, A., GUINEA, A. & FERNÄNDEZ-GALIANO, D. (1985): 6tude du processus de bipartition chez Opisthonetta henneguyi FAUR6-
FREMIET, 1906 (Ciliophora, Peritrichida). - Protistologica, 2l: 333-338.
SOLA, A., GUINEA, A. & FERNÄNDEZ-GALIANO, D. (1989): Light microscopical study of the conjugation process in Opisthonetta
henneguyiFAIJRE,-FREMIET (Ciliophora: Peritrichida). - Acta Protozool.,28:239244.
SOMMARUGA, R. & PSENNER, R. (1993): Nanociliates of the order Prostomatida: their relevance in the microbial food web of a meso-
trophic lake. - Aquatic Sciences, 55: ll9 181.
SOMMER, G. (1951): Die peritrichen Ciliaten des Großen Plöner Sees. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 44:349440.
SOMMER, U. (1994): Planktologie. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, London, Paris, Tokyo, Hong Kong, Barcelona, Buda-
pesr.2l4 pp.
SONDHEIM, M. (1929): Protozoen aus der Ausbeute der Voeltzkowschen Reisen in Madagaskar und Ostafrika. - Abh. senckenb. natur-
forsch. Ges., 4l: 283-3 13.
SONG, W. (1993): Studies on the cortical morphogenesis during cell division in Halteria grandinella (MÜLLER, 1773) (Ciliophora, Oligo-
trichida). - Chin. J. Oceanol. Limnol., ll: 122-129.
SONG, W. & WILBERT, N. (1989): Taxonomische Untersuchungen an Aufwuchsciliaten (Protozoa, Ciliophora) im Poppelsdorfer Weiher,
Bonn. - Lauterbornia, Heft 3: 2-221.
SONG, W., CHENG, X., LIU, G. & WU, L. (1993): Ecological studies on the periphytonic protozoans in Xiaoxihu Lake, Qingdao. - J. Oce-
an Univ. Qingdao, 23: 99-106 (in Chinese with English summary).
SORGELOOS, P. (1970): Oecologische studie van twee kleine vijvers in de omgeving van Wevelgem (West-Vlaanderen). Biol. Jaarb.,38:
I 88-208.
SOROKIN, Y.I. (1999): Aquatic microbial ecology. A textbook for students in environmental sciences. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden.
248 pp.
SOROKIN, Y.I. & PAVELJEVA, E.B. (1972): On the quantitative characteristics of the pelagic ecosystem of Dalnee lake (Kamchatka). -
Hydrobiologia, 40: 5 l9-5 52.
SOUTO, S. (1973): Contribucion al conocimiento de los tintinnidos de agua dulce de la republica Argentina. L Rio de la Plata y delta del
Parana (Contribution to the knowledge of the Argentine fresh-water tintinnids. I. Rio de la Plata and Parana delta). Physis, B. Aires,
32:249-254.
SOUTO, S. (1974): Tintinnidos del Rio de la Plata y su zona de influencia (Protozoa, Ciliata) (Tintinnids from the river Plate and its influ-
ence area). - Physis, B. Aires, 33:201-205.
SPANDL, H. (1926): Die Tierwelt vorübergehender Gewässer Mitteleuropas. - Arch. Hydrobiol., 16: '7 4-132.
SPANDL, H. (1926a): Die Tierwelt der unterirdischen Gewässer. - Speläologische Monographien, 11: I-XII & l-235.
§RÄUBK-HU§EK, R. (1946): Kpozndni epizoickj'ch nälevnikü z ieky Vltavy (Some epizoic ciliates from the river Vltava). Vöst. ösl.
zool. Spol., l0: 241-244 (in Czech with English summary).
SnÄUef-UU§EK, R. (1947): Dal§i citiata - holotricha na§ich iek. Piispövky k poznäni öeskoslovensklich nälevnikü II. - Cas. närod.Mus.,
116: 3644 (in Czech with English summary).
§nÄugx-uU§EK, R. (1948): Ciliara-Peritricha na§ich iek (Les infusoires p6ritriches des riviöres Tch6coslovaques). - Cas. närod. Mus.,
ll7: 161-183 (in Czech with French summary).
SRÄUEK-HUSEK, R. (1953): K otäzce taxonomie a pathogenity na§ich ektoparasitickj,ch brousilek (Urceolariidae). (Zur Frage der Taxo-
nomie und der Pathogenität unserer ektoparasitischen Urceolariiden). Zool. ent. Listy,2 (16): 167-180 (in Czech with Russian and
German summary).
769

Literature
SnÄVfpf-ffUSEK, R. (1956): Spoleöenstva nälevnikü z povodi Moravice a jejich vztahy k öistotö vody (Die Ciliatengemeinschaften aus
dem Flussgebiete von Moravice und ihre Beziehungen zur Wasserverunreinigung). - Vöst. ösl. zool. Spol., 20:15-85 (in Czech with
Russian and German summary).
SnÄUBf-gU§EK, R. (1957): Kpozndni nälevniku ostravsk6ho kraje (Zur Kenntnis der Ciliaten des Ostrauer-Gebietes (Tschechoslova-
kei )). - Vöst. ösl. zool. Spol.. 2l : I 24 {in Czech witlr German sümmary).
STABELL, T. (1996): Ciliate bacterivory in epilimnetic waters. - Aquat. microb. Ecol., 10: 265-212.
STAMM, G. (1984): Untersuchungen über Lebensbedingungen von Ciliatenarten in Belebtschlammanlagen. Dissertation Universität Zürich.
8o pp.
STARMÜHLNER, F., VORNATSCHER, J., KUSEL-FETZMANN, E., STEINER, H. & ASCHENBRENNER, L. (1972): Die pflanzen-
und Tierwelt der Altwässer. tn STARMÜHLNER, F & EHRENDORFER, F. (eds.): Naturgeschichte Wiens Band 2, pp. 577458. tu-
gend & Volk, Wien, München.
STEHLE, M.E. ( 1923): Surface plankton protozoa from Lake Erie in the Put-in-Bay region. - Ohio J . Sci., 23: 4l-54.
STEIN, F. (1854): Die Infusionsthiere auf ihre Entwickelungsgeschichte untersucht. W. Engelmann, Leipzig.265 pp.
STEIN, F. (1859): Der Organismus der Infusionsthiere nach eigenen Forschungen in systematischer Reihenfolge bearbeitet. I. Abtheilung.
Allgemeiner TheiI und Naturgeschichte der hypotrichen Infusionsthiere. W. Engelmann, Leipzig.206 pp.
STEIN, F. (1 859a): Characteristik neuer Infusorien-Gattungen. - Lotos, 9:2-5, 57-6O.
STEIN, F. ( 1863): Neue Infusorienformen in der Ostsee. - Amtliche Berichte Deutscher Naturforscher und ßrzte in Karlsbad, 37. Versamm-
lung im September 1862: 16l-162,165-166.
STEIN, F. (1867): Der Organismus der Infusionsthiere nach eigenen Forschungen in systematischer Reihenfolge bearbeitet. II. Abtheilung.
1) Darstellung der neuesten Forschungsergebnisse über Bau, Fortpflanzung und Entwickelung der Infusionsthiere. 2) Naturgeschichte
der heterotrichen Infusorien. Engelmann, Leipzig. 355 pp.
STEINMANN, P. & SURBECK, G. (1934): Untersuchungen über das Zooplankton des Rotsees bei Luzem. - Z. Hydrol. Hydrogr. Hydro-
biol.,6: 152-215.
STELLA, E. & SALVADORI, F.B. (1953): La fauna acquatica della grotta "di punta degli Stretti,, (Monte Argentario). - Archo zool. ital.,
38:441483.
STENSON, J.A.E. (1984): Interactions between pelagic metazoan and protozoan zooplankton, an experimental study. - Hydrobiologia, 111:
101-tt2.
STERKI, V. ( 1878): Beiträge zur Morphologie der Oxytrichinen. - Z. wiss. Zool.,3l:29-58.
STERKI, V. ( 1879): Tintinnus semiciliatus. Eine neue Infusorienart. - Z. wiss. Zool.,32:460465.
STEWART, P.M., SMITH, E.P., PRATT, J.R., MCCORMICK, P.V. & CAIRNS, J.Jr. (1986): Multivariate analysis of protist communities
in lentic systems. - J. Protozool., 33: 152-156.
STILLER, J. ( I 93 1a): Die peritrichen Infusorien von Tihany und Umgebung. Arb. ung. biol. Forschlnst. , 4: 17 1-2O5.
STILLER, J. (1931b): Über Kolonienbildung bei Rhabdostyla ovumKENT. - Acta Litt. Scient. R. Univ. hung. Francisco-Josephina, Acta
biologica, 2:374O.
STILLER, J. ( 1935): Drei neue Peritrichen-Arten aus dem Balaton- See. - Acta Litt. Scient. R. Univ. hung. Francisco-Josephina, Acta biolo-
gica,3: 149-157 .
STILLER, l. (1931): Biologische Untersuchungen eines Wasserwerkes in der Umgebung von Budapest. Mitt. Landesanst. Wass.- Boden-
u. Lufthyg., 13: 2Ol-218.
STILLER, J. (1939): Eine neue Gattung der Ordnung Peritricha. Geleiella vagans gen. n. sp. n. - Acta biol. hung.,5: 53-56.
STILLER,J.(1940):BeitragzurPeritrichenfaunadesGroßenPlönerSeesinHolstein.-Arch.Hydrobiol.,36:263 285.
STILLER, l. (1941): Epizoische Peritrichen aus dem Balaton. - Arb. ung. biol. Forschlnst.,13:2ll-223.
STILLER, J. (1942a): Einige Gewässer der Umgebung von Szeged und ihre Peritrichenfauna. - Arch. Hydrobiol.,38: 313-435.
STILLER, J. (1942b): Ein interessanter Fundort von Epistylis nympharum ROUX (Protozoa, Ciliata). Annls hist.-nat. Mus. natn. hung.,
Zoologica,35: 88-90.
STILLER, l. (1946): Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Peritrichenfauna der Schwefelthermen von Split. - Annls hist.-nat. Mus. natn. hung., 39:
t9-57.
STILLER, J. ( I 953): Epizoische Peritrichen aus dem Balaton IIL - Hydrobiologia , 5: 189-221 .
STILLER, J. (1957): Zur Biologie und Verbreitung der Protozoen- und Crustaceenfauna eines Mittelgebirgsbaches in Ungam. - Arch. Hy-
drobiol., 53:392424.
STILLER, J. (1960): Die limnologischen Verhältnisse des Naturschutzgebietes von Bätorliget in Ungam nebst Beschreibung einiger neuer
Peritrichen-Arten (Ciliata, Protozoa). - Arch. Hydrobiol., 56: I 86-260.
STILLER, J. (1911): Szäjkoszorüs csill6sok - Peritricha. - Fauna Hung., 105: 1-245 & 6 pages index (in Hungarian).
STILLER, J. (1974): Jär61äbacskäs csill6sok - Hypotrichida. - Fauna Hung., 115: l-l 87 (in Hungarian).
STILLER, J. (1975): Die Familie Strongylidiidae FAURE-FREMIET, 1961 (Ciliata: Hypotrichida) und Revision der Gattung Hypotric.hidi-
arn ILOWAISKY,1921. -Acta zool. hung.,21: 221-231.
STOECKER, D.K. (1998): Conceptual models of mixotrophy in planktonic protists and some ecological and evolutionary implications. -
Europ. J. Protistol., 34: 281290.
STOECKER, D.K. &CAPUZZO, J.M. (1990): Predation on protozoa: its importance to zooplankton. - J. Plankton Res., 12: 891-908.
STOECKER, D.K., GIFFORD, D.J. & PUTT, M. (1994): Preservation of marine planktonic ciliates: losses and cell shrinkage during fixati-
on. - Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 110: 293--299.
STOKES, A.C. (1884): Notes on some apparently undescribed infusoria from putrid waters. - Am. Nat., 18 (February 1884): 133-140.
STOKES, A.C. ( 1884a): Notices of new fresh-water infusoria. - Am. mon. microsc. I ., 5: 121-125.
STOKES, A.C. (1885): Some new infusoria from American fresh waters. - Ann. Mag. nat. Hist., Serie 5, 15: 437449.
STOKES, A.C. (1885a): Some new infusoria. Am. Nat., 19:.433443.
770

Literature
STOKES, A.C. ( I 886a): Notices of new fresh-water infusoria. - Proc. Am. phil. Soc., 23: 562-568.
STOKES, A.C. (1886b): Some new infusoria from American fresh waters. - No. 2. Ann. Mag. nat. Hist., Serie 5, 17: 98 I 12.
STOKES, A.C. (1887a): Some new hypotrichous infusoria from American fresh waters. - Ann. Mag. nat. Hist., Serie 5,20:- 104-114.
STOKES, A.C. (1887b): Notices of new fresh-water infusoria. - Proc. Am. phit. Soc., 24:244--255.
STOKES, A.C. ( 1887c): Notices of new fresh-water infusoria.-Vl. Am. mon. microsc. J., 8: l4l-141 .
STOKES, A.C. (1887d): Notices of new American fresh-water infusoria. -Jl R. microsc. Soc., year 1887: 35-40.
STOUT, J.D. (1956): Reaction of ciliates to environmental factors. -Ecology,37: 178-191.
STRAILE, D. (1997): Gross growth efficiencies ofprotozoan and metazoan zooplankton and their dependence on food concentration, preda-
tor-prey weight mtio, and taxonomic group. - Limnol. Oceanogr., 42: 1375-1385.
STRAND, E. (1928): Miscellanea nomenclatorica zoologica et palaeontologica. I-II. - Arch. Naturgesch., 92 (year 1926):30-75.
STRÜDER-KYPKE, M. (1996): Untersuchungen der Protistenfauna ausgewählter Kesselmoore unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Fla-
gellaten und Ciliaten. Dissertation Universität Berlin. I 54 pp.
STRZELECKI, J. & PÖLTORAK, T. (1971): The plankton of Lake Gardno near the Baltic Sea during the summer season. - Acta
hydrobiol., Krak6w, 13: 269-294.
SU, L. et at. (1988): A preliminary investigation on the protozoa of Chongqing. - Sichuan Joumal of Zoology,T'. 14.
SUDZUKI, M. (1964): Zur biologischen Analyse der mikroskopischen Süsswassertierwelt geringster Wassermengen. II. Ein Entwurf zum
theoretischen Faunenbild auf Grund der Umwandlung der Moosfaunenzusammensetzung. - Zool. Mag., Tokyo, 73: 245-250 (in Japane-
se with German summary).
SUDZUKI, M. (1978): Recent portrait of wild biota in Japan. IV. Animalcules in the area of Mt. Fuji including 5 lakes, grasslands and fo-
rests at the foot of the mountain. * Obun Ronso, 9:235-217 (in Japanse).
SUDZUKI, M. (1981): Periphytic biota (Aufwuchs) in sewages and park waters. In SUDZUKI, M. (ed.): Some approaches to saprobiologi-
cal problems, pp. 69-107. Sanseido Co. Ltd., Tokyo.
SULLIVAN, W.D. ( 1957): Identification of protozoa from the region of Point Barrow, Alaska. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 76: 189-196.
SUTTON, W.W. (1976): Effects of irradiation on the peritrich ciliates Vorticella and, Telotrochidium. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 95:
366-372.
SUZUKI, T. & TANIGUCHI, A. (1995): Sinking rate of loricae of some common tintinnid ciliates. - Fisheries Oceanography,4:
257-263.
§VBC, tr. (1897): Beiträge zur Kenntnis der Infusorien Böhmens. I. Die ciliaten Infusorien des Unterpoöernitzer Teiches. - Bull. int. Acad.
tch6que Sci., 4:2947. I
SYDENHAM, D.H.J. (1971): A re-assessment of the relative importance of ciliates, rhizopods and rotatorians in the ecology of activated
sludge. - Hydrobiologia, 38: 553-563.
SZENTIVÄNY, M. & TIRJAKOVÄ, E. (1994): The structure and dynamics of the community of Ciliophora in the benthos of the Karlova
Ves (Bratislava) branch of the Danube. - Acta Fac. Rerum nat. Univ. comen., Bratisl., Series Zoologia,3S: 83-102.
TAI, L.-S. ( l93l ): Notes on fresh water protozoa of Peiping. - Sci. Rep. natn. Tsing Hua Univ., L: 1-61.
TAKAHASHI, T. & SUHAMA, M. (1991): Ciliated protozoan fauna in paddy fields. - Bull. Jap. Soc. Microb. Ecol.,6: 103-l l5 (in Japane-
se with English summary).
TAKAMURA, N., ZHU, X.-B., YANG, H.-Q., JIANG, X.-Y., LI, J.-L., MEI, Z.-P., SHI, Z.-F. & TAN, Y.-J. (1995): Characteristics of
plankton communities in Chinese integrated fish ponds: effects ofexcessive grazing by planktivorous carps on plankton communities. -
Hydrobiologia, 315: 2l l-225 .
TAKEDA, H., SEKIGUCHI, T., NUNOKAWA, S. & USUKI, I. (1998): Species-specificity of Chlorella for establishment of symbiotic as-
sociation with Paramecium bursaria - Does infectivity depend upon sugar components of the cell wall? - Europ. J. Protistol., 34:
I 33- I 37.
TAMAR, H. (1965): The culture, structure, and locomotion of Halteria grandinella. - Acta Protozool., 3: 165*113.
TAMAR, H. ( 1968): Observations on Halteria bifurcata sp. n. and Halteria grandinella. - Acta Protozool., 6: 175-183.
TAMAR, H. ( 1971): Mesodinium fimbriatum STOKES, 1887, a oiliate with bifurcated and barbed cirri. - Acta Protozool.,9:209*222.
TAMAR, H. (1973): Observations on Askenasia volvox (CLAPAREDE & LACHMANN, 1859). - J. Protozool., 20: 46-50.
TAMAR, H. (1974): Further studies on Halteria. - Acta Protozool.,13: 177-190.
TAMAR, H. (1979): The movements of jumping ciliates. - Arch. Protistenk., 122:290-327.
TAMAR, H. (1982): On the distribution of Halteria bifurcata. - Acta Protozool., 21: 183-188.
TAMAR, H. (1986): Four marine species of Mesodinium (Ciliophora: Didiniidae).1. Mesodinium velox n. sp. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc.,
105: 130-140.
TAMAR, H. (1987): On division in a fresh-water Mesodinium acarus. - Acta Protozool.,26:213-218.
TAMAR, H. (1990): Halteria bifurcata TAMAR, 1968, distribution and variation, and Holteria grandinella O. F. MÜLLER, 1773. - Arch.
Protistenk., t38: 3-15.
TAMAR, H. (1992): Four marine species of Mesodinium (Ciliophora: Mesodiniidae) Il. Mesodinium pulex CLAP. & LACHM., 1858. -
Arch. Protistenk ., l4l:284-303.
TARTAR, V. (1961): The biology of Stentor. Pergamon Press, Oxford.4l3 pp.
TAYLOR, W.D. (1978): Maximum growth rate, size and commonness in a community of bactivorous ciliates. - Oecologia (Berlin), 36:
263-272.
TAYLOR, W.D. (1979a): Sampling data on the bacterivorous ciliates of a small pond compared to neutral models of community structure. -
Ecology,60: 876-883.
TAYLOR, W.D. (1979b): Overlap among cohabiting ciliates in their growth responses to various prey bacteria. - Can. J. Zool., 57:
949-951.
77 1

Literature
TAYLOR, W.D. (1984): Phosphorus flux through epilimnetic zooplankton from Lake Ontario: relationship with body size and significance
to phytoplankton. Can. J. Fish. aquat. Sci., 4l: l'702-1712.
TAYLOR, W.D. & BERGER, J. (1980): Microspatial heterogeneity in the distribution of ciliates in a small pond. - Microb. Ecol., 6:
2'.7-34.
TAYLOR, W.D. & HEYNEN, M.L. ( 1987): Seasonal and vertical distribution of Ciliophora in Lake Ontario. - Can. J. Fish. aquat. Sci., 44:
2185-2191.
TAYLOR, W.D. & JOHANNSSON, O.E. ( 199 I ): A comparison of estimates of productivity and consumption by zooplankton for plankto-
nic ciliates in Lake Ontario. J. Plankton Res., 13: 363-372.
TAYLOR, W.D. & LEAN, D.R.S. ( I 98 I ): Radiotracer experiments on phosphorus uptake and release by limnetic microzooplanftton. - Can.
J. Fish. aquat. Sci.,38: 1316-1321.
TAYLOR, W.D. & LEAN, D.R.S. ( 1991): Phosphorus pool sizes and fluxes in the epilimnion of a mesotrophic lake. Can. J. Fish. aquat.
Sci.,48: 1293-1301.
TAYLOR, W.D. & SHUTER, B.J. (1981): Body size, genome size, and intrinsic rate of increase in ciliated protozoa. - Am. Nat., 118:
t6o-t'12.
TENT, L. (1981): Der Aufwuchs im Hamburger Hafen. Struktur einer Biocoenose in einem Belastungszentrum des Elbe-Aestuars. - Arch.
Hydrobiol., Suppl. 61: 1-58.
THIEBAUD, M. & FAVRE, J. (1906): Sur la faune invert6br6e des mares de Pouillerel. -Zool. Anz.,30: 155-163.
THOMAS, E.A. ( l94l ): Beitrag zur Kenntnis des Planktons dreier Zürcher Seen. Z. Hydrol. Hydrogr. Hydrobiol., 9: 34-49.
THOMAS, E.A. (1964): Katalog der Planktonorganismen des Zürich-Obersees und des Zürichsees. - Vjschr. naturf. Ges. Zürich, 109:
103-142.
THOMASSON, K. (1963): Araucanian Lakes. Plankton studies in north Patagonia with notes on terrestrial vegetation. - Acta phytogeogr.
suec.,47: l-139.
THON, K. ( 1905): Über den feineren Bau von Didinium nasutum O. F. M. - Arch. Protistenk., 5: 281.321.
THUNMARK, S. (1945): Zur Soziologie des Süsswasserplanktons. Eine methodologisch-ökologische Studie. - Folia limnol. scand.,3:
l_66.
TIAN, J. (1995): Protozoans in the Xiaoqing River. - Transactions of Oceanology and Limnology, l:33-31 (in Chinese with English sum-
mary).
TIMOFEEVA, I.P. (1989): Planktonic infusoria of the cooler basin of the Cherepetsk power station. - Gos. Nauchno-lssled Inst. Ozern
Rechn Rybn Khoz. Sb. Nauchn Tr., No. 299: 66-75 (in Russian).
TIRJAKOVÄ, E. (1992): Ciliophora of the riverside zone of the Danube river system. - Acta Fac. Rerum nat. Univ. comen., Bratisl., Series
Zoologia,36: 7 l-80.
TIRJAKOVÄ, E. ( 1993): Struktrira a dynamika populäcii nälevnikov (Ciliophora) rieky Turiec. - Biol6gia, Bratisl., 48: l3l-139.
TIzuAKOVÄ, E. & MATIS, D. (1987): Ciliated Protozoa (Ciliophora) from submerged, wet, moist and dry mosses in selected localities of
Slovensky raj. - Acta Fac. Rerum nat. Univ. comen., Bratisl., Series Zoologia,29: l-16.
TÖNNIGES, C. (19t4): Die Trichocysten von Frontonia leucas (EHRBC.) und ihr chromidialer Ursprung. Ein Beitrag zur Chromidialtheo-
rie. - Arch. Protistenk., 32:298-318.
TOSCHI, A. ( 1937): Ricerche sul plancton delle valli della Mesola. - Boll. Pesca Piscic. Idrobiol., 13: 241-261 .
TROSHINA, T.T. (1984): Free-living infusoria in plankton community of the Kapchagaisk reservoir. In ANDRUSHAITIS, G.P., BOIK-
OVA, E.E. & LIEPA, R.A. (eds.): Ecology of marine and fresh water protozoans (Proceedings of the first symposium), pp. I I l-l 13.
Academy of Sciences of the Latvian SSR, Salaspils (in Russian).
TROSHINA, T.T. (1994): Fauna of plancton infusoria in Balkhash Lake. - Selevinia,2:45-52 (in Russian with English summary).
TUCKER, J.B. (1912): Microtubule arms and propulsion of food particles inside a large feeding organelle in the ciliate Phascolodon vorti-
cella. -J. Cell Sci., 10: 883-903.
TUCOLESCO, J. (1962): Ecodynamique des infusoires du littoral Roumain de la mer Noire et des bassins sal6s para-marins. - Annls Sci.
nat. (Zool.), 12" s6rie,3: 785-845.
TUFFRAU, M. (1965): Le phototropisme chez les protozoaires. Revue des donn6es essentielles r6sultant des principaux travaux. - Ann6e
biol., 4:261-281.
TUFFRAU, M. (1968): Les structures fibrillaires somatiques et buccales chez cili6s h6t6rotriches. - Protistologica, 3 (year 1967):
369-394.
TUFFRAU, M. (1970): Le genre Hypott'ithidium: un nouvel exemple de complexit6 structurale et de morphog6nöse primitive chez les cili6s
hypotriches. Analyse de trois espöces, dont une nouvelle. - J. Protozool. Suppl., 17: 38, Abstract 149.
TUFFRAU, M. (1972): Caractöres primitifs et structures 6volu6es chez des cili6s hypotriches: le genre Hypon'ichidium. - Protistologica, 8:
2s1 2§6.
VALKANOV, A. (1938): Hydrobiologische Untersuchungen an einigen Hochgebirgsseen Bulgariens. God. sof. Univ. (phys.-mat.
Section), 34 (years 193711938): l0l-145 (in Russian with German summary).
VAN AS, J.G. & BASSON, L. (1989): A further contribution to the taxonomy of the Trichodinidae (Ciliophora: Peritrichia) and a review of
the taxonomic status of some fish ectoparasitic trichodinids. - Syst. Parasitol ., 14: l5l-119.
VAN BRUGGEN, J.J.A., STUMM, C.K. & VOGELS, G.D. (1983): Symbiosis of methanogenic bacteria and sapropelic protozoa. -Archs
Microbiol., 136: 89-95.
VAN OYE, P. (1922): Contribution ä la connaissance de la flore et de la faune microscopiques des Indes Nderlandaises. - Annls Biol. lacu-
stre, l1: 130-151.
VASCONCELOS, V. (1990): Seasonal fluctuation in the zooplankton community of Azibo reservoir (Portugal). - Hydrobiologia, 196:
l 83-19 l.
VEILLEUX, B.G. ( 1979): An analysis of the predatory interaction between Paramet ium and Didinium. - J. Anim. Ecol., 48: 787-803.
112

Literature
VEJDOVSKV, F. (1882): Thierische Organismen der Brunnenwässer von Prag. Selbstverlag - in Commission von Franz Rivnäö, Prag.
66 pp.
VERSCHAFFELT, F. (1930): Bijdrage tot de kennis der nederlandsche zoet- en brakwaterprotozoön. - Bot. Jaarb., 21 (years 1927-1929):
1-199 (in Flemish; also published as dissertation by Erasmus, Ledeberg/Gent in 1929).
VERWORN, M. (1889): Psycho-physiologische Protisten-Studien. Experimentelle Untersuchungen. G. Fischer, Jena. 219 pp.
VILLENEUVE-BRACHON, S. (1940): Recherches sur les ci1i6s h6t6rotriches. Cin6tome, argyrome, myonömes, formes nouvelles ou peu
connues. - Archs Zool. exp. g6n., 82: 1-1 80.
VINOGRADOV, A.P. (1953): The elementary chemical composition of marine organisms. - Mem. Sears Fdn mar. Res.,2: 163-175.
VIRIEUX, J. (1916): Recherches sur le plancton des lacs du Jura central. - Annls Biol. lacustre, 8:5-192.
VOIGT, M. (1901): Diagnosen bisher unbeschriebener Organismen aus Plöner Gewässem. -Zool. Anz.,25:.35-39.
VOIGT, M. (1902): Einige Ergebnisse aus den Untersuchungen ostholsteinischer Seen. - ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 9:4741.
VOIGT, M. (1902a): Neue Organismen aus Plöner Gewässem. - ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 9:3346.
VOIGT, M. ( I 903): Das Zooplankton des Kleinen Uklei- und Plus-Sees bei Plön. - ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 10: 105-1 15.
VÖLKER, L. (1964): Physiographie und Plankton des Steinbrücker Teiches bei Darmstadt. - SchrReihe Inst. Naturschutz, Darmstadt, 7 (3):
| -63.
VUXANOVICI, A. (1961): Noi contributii la studiul ciliatelor dulcicole din Republica Popularä Rominä (Nota II). - Studii Cerc. Biol. (Biol.
Anim.), 15: 65-93 (in Roumaninan with Russian and French summaries).
VUXANOVICI , A. (1962): Contributii la sistematica ciliatelor (Nota III) (Contribution ä la syst6matique des cilids (Note III)). - Studii Cerc.
Biol., Seria "biologie animala", 14: 549-573 (in Romanian with French summary).
VUXANOVICI, A. (1962a): Contributii la sistematica ciliatelor (Nota I). -Studii Cerc. Biol. (Biol. Anim.), 14: 197-215 (in Romanian with
French summary).
VUXANOVICI, A. (1963): Contributii la sistematica ciliatelor (Nota IV). - Studii Cerc. Biol. (Biol. Anim.), 15: 65-93 (in Roumaninan with
Russian and French summaries).
WAILES, G.H. (1938): A new tintinnid from lake Windermere. - Ann. Mag. nat. Hist. (Series 11), l: 496497.
WAILES, G.H. ( 1939): The plankton of Lake Windermere, England. - Ann. Mag. nat. Hist. (Series I l), 3: 401414.
WALKER, G.K., EDWARDS, C.A. & SUCHARD, S.J. (1989): Encystment in the peritrich clliate Telotrochidium henneguyi. - Cytobios,
59:7-18.
WANG, C.C. (1925): Study of the protozoa of Nanking Part I. - Contr. biol. Lab. Sci. Soc. China, L: 1-60. I
WANG, C.C. (1928): Ecological studies of the seasonal distribution of protozoa in a fresh-water pond. - J. Morph., 46: 431478.
WANG, C.C. & NIE, D. (1933): Report on the rare and new species of fresh-water infusoria, part I. - Contr. biol. Lab. Sci. Soc. China,Zoo-
logical series, 10: 1-99.
WANG, l. (1977): Protozoa from some districes of Tibetan plateau. - Acta zool. sin., 23: 131-160 (in Chinese with English summary).
WANG, S. (1994): A new Chinese recordof Enchelyomorpha and new distributive species ofnine rare free living protozoan offresh water
in China. - Acta Hy&obiol. sin., 18: 170-173 (in Chinese with English summary).
WARREN, A. (1986): A revision ot the genus Vorticella (Ciliophora: Peritrichida). - Bull. Br. Mus. nat. Hist. (Zool.), 50: 1*57.
WARREN, A. (1988): A revision of Haplocaulus PRECHT, 1935 (Ciliophora: Periffichida) and its morphological relatives. - Bull. Br. Mus.
nat. Hist. (Zool.),54: 12'7-152.
WEATHERBY, J.H. (1929): Excretion of nitrogenous substances in protozoa. - Physiol. Zoö1.,2:375-394.
WEBB, M.G. (1956): An ecological study of brackish water ciliates. - J. Anim. Ecol., 25: 148-175.
WEBB, M.G. (1961): The effects of thermal stratification on the distribution of benthic protozoa in Esthwaite Water. - J. Anim. Ecol., 30:
r 37-r 5 l.
WEGELIN, R. ( 1966): Beitrag zur Kenntnis der Grundwasserfauna des Saale-Elbe-Einzugsgebietes. - Zool. lb. Syst., 93: l-l 17.
WEGL, R. (1983): Index für die Limnosaprobität. - Wass. Abwass. Wien, 26: 1-175.
WEISSE, T. (1991): The annual cycle of heterotrophic freshwater nanoflagellates: role of bottom-up versus top-down control. - J. Plankton
Res.,13: 167-185.
WEISSE, T. & MONTAGNES, D.J.S. (1998): Effect of temperature on inter- and intraspecific isolates of Urotricha (Prostomatida, Cilio-
phora). - Adv. microb. Ecol., 15:-285-291.
WEISSE, T. & MÜLLER, H. (1990): Significance of heterotrophic nanoflagellates and ciliates in large lakes: evidence from Lake Constan-
ce. In TILZER, M.M. & SERRUYA, C. (eds.): Large lakes - Ecological structure and function, pp. 540-555. Springer, Berlin.
WEISSE, T. & MÜLLER, H. (1998): Planktonic protozoa and the microbial food web in Lake Constance. - Arch. Hydrobiol. Spec. Issues
Advanc. Limnol., 53: 223-254.
WENINGER, G. (1974): Ökologische Untersuchungen an Wienerwaldbächen. - Wass. Abwass. Wien, 1974: 121-163.
WENRICH, D.H. (1929): Observations on some freshwater ciliates (Protozoa) I. Teuthophrys trisulca CHATTON and DE BEAUCHAMP
and Stokesia vernalis n. g., n. sp. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 48: 221-241.
WENRICH, D.H. (1929a): Observations on some freshwater ciliates (Protozoa) ll. Paradileptus, n. gen. - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 48:
352-365.
WENRICH, D.H. (1929b): The structure and behavior of Actinobolus voroxt. sp. (Protozoa, Ciliata). - Biol. Bull. mar. biol. Lab., Woods
Hole,56: 39H01.
WESENBERG-LUND, C. (1925): Contributions to the biology of Zoothamnium geniculaturn AYRTON. - K. danske Vidensk. Selsk. Skr.,
10: 1-53.
WESENBERG-LUND, C. (1952): De danske s@ers og dammes dyriske plankton. Ejnar Munksgaard, Kobenhavn. 182 pp.
WESSENBERG, H. & ANTIPA, G. (1968): Studies on Didil,ium nasutum I. Structure and ultrastructure. - Protistologica,4:421441.
WESSENBERG, H. & ANTIPA, G. (1970): Capture and ingestion of Parameciumby Didinium nasutum. - J. Protozool., 17:250-27O.
WEST, L.S. (1953): Protozoa of the upper peninsula of Michigan. - Pap. Mich. Acad. Sci., 38: 269-284.
113

Lit".rtrr"
WEST, L.S. & LUNDIN, F.C. ( 1963): Further progress in the study of Michigan protozoa. - Pap. Mich. Acad. Sci., 48: 87-l I l.
WETZEL, A. (1925): Vergleichend cytologische Untersuchungen an Ciliaten. - Arch. Protistenk., 51: 209 304.
WETZEL, A. (1928): Der Faulschlamm und seine ziliaten Leitformen. - Z. Morph. Ökol. Tiere, 13: 179-328.
WETZEL, A. (1928a): ZurFrage der Verunreinigung des Bodenseewassers durch den Zufluß der Schussen und der Möglichkeit ihrer Beur-
teilung durch die Beobachtung der Protozoenbiocönosen. - Int. Revue ges. Hydrobiot. Hydrogr., 19:2ll 260.
WETZEL, A. (1929): Die Protozoen der Schneeberger Erzbergwerke. - Zool. Jb. Syst., 56: 261-268.
WIACKOWSKI, K., DONIEC, A. & FYDA, l. (1994): An empirical study of the effect of fixation on ciliate cell volume. - Marine Microbi-
al Food Webs, 8: 59-69.
WIACKOWSKI, K., BRETT, M.T. & GOLDMAN, C.R. (1994a): Differential effects of zooplankton species on ciliate community structure.
- Limnol. Oceanogr., 39:486492.
WICKHAM, S.A. (1995a): Trophic relations between cyclopodid copepods and ciliated protists: complex interactions link the microbial and
classic food webs. -Limnol. Oceanogr.,40: I173-l l8l.
WICKHAM, S.A. (1995b): Cyt'lops predation on ciliates: species-specific differences and functional responses. - J. Plankton Res., 17:
t633-1646.
WICKHAM, S.A. & GILBERT, J.J. (1993): The comparative importance of competition and predation by Daphnia on ciliated protists. -
Arch. Hydrobiol., 126:. 289-3 13.
WICKHAM, S.A., GILBERT, J.J. & BERNINGER, U.-G. ( 1993): Effects of rotifers and ciliates on the growth and survival of Daphnia. - l.
Plankton Res., 15: 317-334.
WIERSMA-VERSCHAFFELT, F. ( 1936): Protozoa. - Flora Fauna Zuiderzee Suppl., year 1936: 24-40.
WILBERT, N. (1969): Ökologische Untersuchung der Aufwuchs- und Planktonciliaten eines eutrophen Weihers. - Arch. Hydrobiol. Suppl.,
35:4ll-518.
WILBERT, N. (1972): Die Infraciliatur von Maritu.ja pelagica GAJEWSKAJA, 1928. J. Protozool., 19:59V592.
WILBERT,N.(1975):EineverbesserteTechnikderProtargolimprägnationfürCiliaten.-Mikrokosmos,64:11l 119.
WILBERT, N. (1977): Taxonomische Untersuchungen an Ophrydium t,(rsatile O. F. MÜLLER 1786 (Ciliophora, Peritrichida). - Arch. Pro-
tistenk., I l9: 54-59.
WILBERT, N. (1983): Eine neue Imprägnation der Basalkörper bei Wimpertieren. Silberimprägnation mit Pyridin-Silberkarbonat nach
Fernandez-Galiano. - Mikroksomos, 72: 193-197.
WILBERT, N. (1986a): Beitrag zur Morphologie und Ökologie einiger planktischer Ciliaten aus dem Poppelsdorfer Weiher in Bonn (BRD).
- Arch. Protistenk., 131: 59-69.
WILBERT, N. (1986b): Ciliates from saline lakes in Saskatchewan. - Symposia Biologica Hungarica, 33:249-256.
WILBERT, N. ( I 986c): Ciliaten aus dem Interstitial des Ontario Sees. Acta Protozool., 25: 319-396.
WILBERT, N. ( I 995): Benthic ciliates of salt lakes. - Acta Protozool.,34: 21 l-288.
WILBERT, N. & KAHAN, D. ( l98l): Ciliates of Solar Lake on the Red Sea Shore. - Arch. Protistenk.,l24:1V95.
WILBERT, N. & SCHMALL, G. (1976): Morphologie und Infraciliatur von Coleps nolandi KAHL, 1930. - Protistologica,12: 193-197.
WILLEY, R.L. & WALKOSZ, R.A. ( 1975): The scopula of Oplz'ydiunt versatile (Ciliophora: Peritrichida). - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 94:
427432.
WINKLER, R.H. & CORLISS, J.O. (1965): Notes on the rarely described, green colonial protozoon Ophrydium versatile (O.F.M.) (Cilio-
phora, Peritrichida). - Trans. Am. microsc. Soc., 84: 121-131.
WÖLFL, S. (1996): Untersuchungen zur Zooplanktonstruktur einschließtich der mikrobiellen Gruppen unter besonderer Berücksichtigung
der mixotrophen Ciliaten in zwei süchilenischen Andenfußseen. - Konstanzer Dissertationen , 497: I-Xll, l-242.
WOLSKA, M. ( 1966): Application of the ammonium-silver impregnation method to the investigation of ciliates from the rumen of herbivo-
rous mammals. - Acta Protozool., 4: 105 I 08.
WOLTERECK, R. (1906): Mitteilungen aus der Biologischen Station in Lunz iN.-Ö.). - Biol. Zbl., 26:463-480.
WRZESNIOWSKI, A. ( 1870): Beobachtungen über Infusorien aus der Umgebung von Warschau. - Z. wiss. Zool.,20: 461-51| .
WRZESNIOWSKI, A. (1877): Beiträge zur Naturgeschichte der Infusorien. - Z. wiss. Zool.,29:267-323.
WULFF, A. (191.9): Ueberdas Kleinplankton der Barentssee. Wiss. Meeresunters., Abt. Helgoland, 13:96-125.
XU, Z. (1992): The abundance of epizoic ciliate Epistylis daphniae related to their host Moina ntacrocopa in an urban stream. - J. inverte-
brate Path., 60: 197-200.
XU,Z.(1993): Theinfection of Moinanru(rocopo byacolonial peritrich, Epistylisdapltniae, anditseffectsonthehost.-Freshwat.Biol.,
30: l8l-186.
YAGIU, R. & SHIGENAKA, Y. ( 1965): Electron microscopy of the ectoplasm and the proboscis in Didiniunt nosutunr. - J. Protozool., 12:
363-38 l .
YANG, H. ( t 989): A winter sarvey of the protozoa from fresh waters of the Yuelushan area. Acta Sci. nat. Univ. Normalis Hunanensis, 12:
l5l-157 (in Chinese with English summary).
YANG, Y. & HUANG, X. (1994): Structure of zooplankton community in Donghu Lake of Wuahn. - Chin. J. appl. Ecol.,5: 319-324 (in
Chinese with English summary).
YANKOVSKIJ, A.V. (1978): The revision of the system of Polyhymenophora class (Spirotrichia). - Tezisy Dokl. zoo[. Inst. Akad. Nauk
SSSR, year 1978: 3940 (in Russian; translation of autor, title, and source after Zool. Rec., I 16, year 1979, p. 144).
YASINDI, A.W. & LYNN, D.H. (1995): The ecology of ciliated protozoa in an East African alkaline-saline lake, Lake Nakuru, Kenya. - J.
Euk. Microbiol. Suppl.,42:35A, Abstract l9l.
YONGUE, W.H.Jr. & CAIRNS, J.Jr. (1973): Long-term exposure of artificial substrates to colonization by protozoans. - J. Elisha Mitchell
scient. Soc., 89: I l5-l I 9.
YONGUE, W.H.Jr. & CAIRNS, J.Jr. (1979): Effects of Radford Army ammunition plant wastes on protozoan communities in the New
River, Virginia. - Riv. Biol., 11: 65-78.
114

Literature
YONGUE, W.H.Jr., CAIRNS, J.Jr. & BOATIN, H.Jr. (1973): A comparison of fresh-waterprotozoan communities in geographically proxi-
mate but chemically dissimilar bodies of water. - Arch. Protistenk., 115: 154-161.
YOU, Y. & XU, Y. (1993): Protozoa, rotifera and cladocera from Meihuashan nature reserve in Fujian province. - Wuyi Science Journal,
l0:6-21 (in Chinese with English summary).
ZACHARIAS, O. ( I 893): Faunistische und biologische Beobachtungen am Gr. Plöner See. - ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 1: l-52.
ZACHARIAS, O. ( I 894): Faunistische Mittheilungen. - ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 2: 57-90.
ZACHARIAS, O. (1894a): Beobachtungen am Plankton des Gr. Plöner See's. -ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön,2:91-137.
ZACHARIAS, O. (1895): Faunistische Mittheilungen. - ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 3: 73-96.
ZACHARIAS,O.(1896):QuantitativeUntersuchungenüberdasLimnoplankton.-ForschBer.biol.StnPlön,4: l-64.
ZACHARIAS,O.(1897):NeueBeiträgezurKenntnissdesSüsswasserplanktons.-ForschBer.biol.StnPlön,5: l-9.
ZACHARIAS, O. (1900): Tric'hodina pediczrlzs EHRB. als Mitglied des Planktons der Binnenseen. -Biol.Zbl.,20:463.
ZACHARIAS, O. (1900a): Ueber die Verschiedenheit der Zusammensetzung des Winterplanktons in grossen und kleinen Seen. -
ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 7 : 64-i 4.
ZACHARIAS, O. (1902): Zur Kenntnis der Planktonverhältnisse des Schöh- und Schluensees. - ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön,9:26-32.
ZACHARIAS, O. (1902a): Zur biologischen Charakteristik des Schwarzsees bei Kitzbühel in Tirol. - Biol. Zbl., 22:'7O1J03.
ZACHARIAS, O. (1903): Zur Kenntnis der niedern Flora und Fauna holsteinischer Moorsümpfe. -ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 10: 223-289.
ZACHARIAS, O. (1903a): Ergänzung zu meiner früheren Beschreibung der Staurophrya elegans. - ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, l0:
312-314.
ZACHARIAS, O. (1905): Hydrobiologische und fischereiwirtschaftliche Beobachtungen an einigen Seen der Schweiz und Italiens. -
ForschBer. biol. Stn Plön, 12: 2ll--229.
ZHADIN, V.l. & GERD, S.V. (1961): Fauna and flora of the rivers, lakes and reservoirs of the U.S.S.R. (Israel Programm for Scientific
Translations, Jerusalem 1963; English translation of the Russian original). 626 pp.
ZHARIKOV, V.V. ( I 982): Study of the free-living infusoria in some waterbodies of Armenia . - Biol. Zh. Armenii, 35: 910-913 (in Russian
with Armenian and English summary).
ZHARIKOV, V.V. ( 1983): Investigation of planktonic infusoria fauna of the Lake Sevan. - Biol. Zh. Armenii, 36: 5 l0-5 I 6 (in Russian with
English summary).
ZHARIKOV, V.V. (1987): A new species of fresh-water infusorians (Oligotrichida) from waters of Armenia. -Zool.Zh.,66:93O-932(in
Russian with English summary). I
ZHARIKOV, V.V. (1992): Investigations of the benthic infusoria of the Kuibyshev reservoir. - Biologiya Vnutrennikh Vod Informatsionnyi
Byulleten, 93:43-50 (in Russian).
ZHARIKOV, V.V. & ROTAR , Y .M. (1992): Composition of the fauna of free-living infusoria in the Kuibyshev reservoir. - Biologiya Vnu-
trennikh Vod Informatsionnyi Byulleten, 92: l9-30 (in Russian).
ZHUKOV, B.F. & MAMAEVA, N.V. (1978): The Ivanovak reseloir and its zoology. Colourless flagellates and infusoria. - Trudy Instituta
Biologii Vnutrennich Vod. (Moskva), 34: 158-173 (in Russian).
ZICK, K. ( 1932); Die Entladung der Nesselkapseln durch Protozoen. - Zool. Anz.,98: l9l-191 .
ZIMMERMANN, H. (1989): Spätwinter- bis Frühsommersituation von Phyto- und Zooplankton im Piburger See (Tirol. Österreich). Diplo-
marbeit Universität Innsbruck. 237 pp.
ZIMMERMANN , H. (1994): Untersuchungen zur Bedeutung der Ciliaten im mikrobiellen Nahrungsnetz des Belauer Sees. Dissertation Uni-
versiläl Hamburg. 164 pp.
ZIMMERMANN, H. (1995): Bedeutung der Ciliaten im mikrobiellen Nahrungsnetz des eutrophen Belauer Sees (Bornhöveder Seenkette,
Norddeutschland),pp.2l l-215. Erweiterte Zusammenfassung der DGL-Tagng 1994, Hamburg.
ZIMMERMANN, H. (1996): Interactions between planktonic protozoans and metazoans after the spring bloom of phytoplankton in a eu-
trophic lake, the Belauer See, in the Bornhöveder Seenkette, North Germany. - Acta Protozool.,35: 215-221.
ZSCHOKKE, F. (1900): Die Tierwelt der Hochgebirgsseen. - Neue Denkschr. allg. schweiz. Ges. ges. Naturw.,37: 1 400.
ZYKOFF, W. (1902): Die Protozoa des Potamoplanktons der Wolga bei Saratow. -ZooL Anz.,25: 177-180.
ZYKOFF, W. (1904): Das Plankton des Seliger Sees. -Zool. Anz.,27:388-394.
ZYKOFF, W. ( 1905): Über das Plankton des Saisan-Sees . -Zool. Anz.,29 471482.
115



7 INDEX
The index contains all names ofciliates mentioned in the book; non-ciliate taxa (for example, food organisms) are not included. Species and
genera treated in detail are in boldface italics print (for example, Pftascolodon vorticella and vorticella, Phascolodon). All other species and
genera (species and genera not treated in detail, homonyms, synonyms, outdated combinations, incorrect spellings) are given in italics (pr.r.s-
tulata,Stylonyc'hiaandStylonychiapustulata). Parentheses,whichareusedtomarkasubgenus(ICZN l985,Article6a),areomittedbecause
in most cases they have not been applied correctly. Suprageneric taxa are given in normal type (for example, Loxodidae), suprageneric taxa
treated in this book are in boldface (for example, Heterotrichida). Communities are printed in spaced type (for example, Cyrtophoretea).
Boldface page number indicates the begin ofthe detailed description.
A ac um i natunT, S tr obi I i d i um 48 Ancistt'ocorua 12
acanthocryptum, Ctedoctema 39, 5l ac un1 i natus, T r op ido atr ac' t us 50 andrese ni, Stentor 665
Acarella siro 139, 140 ac u.ta, Rhopalophrya 47 anguilla, Litonotus 43
acLttunl, Strombidium 48 angusta, Frontonia 41, 5J
acürus, Mesodinium 43, 58, 134, 135, 140,
t4l adae, Ophrydium 540, 544 annnlata, Cothurnia 38
aedic'ulatus, Euplote s 4l Anoplophrya 12
Acaryophrya 30
Acaryophrya collaris 36 ae s culac'antha, H astate lla 41, 461 anser, Amphileptus 36
aJJ'inis, Euplotes 4l anser, Di leptus 39, 53, 2J 5
Acaryophrya helenae 36
Acaryophrya mamillata 36,37 , 42 aJi' i c' a n a, T e uthop hry s 238 apic'ulatunt, Trat'helophyll um 49, 59, 262
Acaryophrya sp. 4l I africana, Teuthophrys trisulca 49, 126,238 A1t i re tta p I a n c ti t' ol a 688
afi'icanum, Hypott'ichidium 671 , 618 Apostom atida 12
acid if'e rus, M etopus 43
Ac'ineta compressa 36 a af gt' ai mc a a n l u ies v, iT , e Z u ot so tp e h ro ry d as s2 y3 s8 52 aps 3h 0e 9ro , n 3ic 1a 0, , 3U lr lo , tr 3ic 1h 2,a 315 30 ,, 35 18 5, , 3 30 11 5, , 33 10 62 ,,
Acinatu ('uspidala 36
agile, Balanitozoon 348 331,334,335,340,342
Acineta elegans 36
Acine ta.flava 36 agilis, U rotricha 50, 348, 352 Apsikn'ata gracilis 42, 5l
Acineta grandis 36 agi lis, U rotric'ha B alanitozoon 348 apttntata, V orticella 494
A Ac ii n ae tt aa l ri n g uu siJ t' ae t" 3a 36 a all b ga iv, o V rao ,r t Pic se ell ua d o5 cl hilodonopsis 46 a aq q u ua a- d cl u tt ll c c i si s , c oV mor pti lec' e x l , t a V o4 r8 ti6 cella 5 l, 59, 450,
c n o h 6
Acinera simplex 36 alle nsi, O percularia 44 452, 486, 495
Alloiozona 12 araucanus, Stentor 48, 56, 553, 662, 665,
Acineta trunc'ata 36
At'ineta tuherosa 36 alveolata, H olophrya 42 668. 67 |
Acropisthiidae 252 alveolata, P elagothrix 42, 45, 341 , 342, arbusctrla, Zoothamnium 5 l, 450
395, 396, 391 , 402 Archistomatina 12
Ac'ropisthium 252
Acropi sthium mutabi le 36, 40, 213 alv e o I a ta, (J rotric' ha 39 5 arcttata, E, nc'he lys 40
acrostomia, Askenasia 36, 57 , 148, l5l, alv,eolatwm, Didiniunt 178 arenaria, Frontonia 4l
155, 161 alveolatum, Monodinium 44, 178, 183, armata, U rorricha 50, 359, 360
Actinobolina 36, I I l, ll2, I 15, I 18, 123, L9l, 196 armatides, Prorodon 46
antbigua, Nassula 44 armatunt, Didinium 19l
124, 125,126
Actinobolina radians 36, 1I2,, I15, 118, ambiguum, SpirostonTum 41 , 53, lJ3, 274, arntatunt, Monodinium 59, l7B, lB3, 191
275 armatus, Enchelyodon 40
l2l , 124, 126, 415 , 694
Actinobolina smalli 36, l12, | 13, 115, I I B, amethystinus, Stentor 48, 553, 662, 664, ar"ntatus, P hilasterides 46
123, 124, 125, 126, l2l 6l l, 612 armatus, Prorodon 46
At'tinobolina spp. 30 antphacanthus, Coleps 38, 2J3, 2J6, )q) armatus, P seudoprorodon 46
Actinobolina vorax 36, l12, I13, I 14, 118, 293,299 armeniensis, Rimostrombidium 4l , 595
Amphileptus 12,232 armeni eirsis, Strobil idi um 595
123,124, 125,126
Actinobolina wenrichii 36, I13, I15, 118, Amphileptus anser 36 artic'ulata, O percuIaria 450
Amphil eptus c'laparedi i 36 Ascopht'ys 12
123
Amphileptus Dileptus trac'helioides 232 aselli, Hcmiophrys 4l
Actinobolinidae 112
Actinobolus radial?.r I 12, llB, 123 Amp hileptus meleagri s 36 Askenasia 30, I I 1, 134, 136, l3J, 140, 142,
Amphileptus pleurosigma 36, 43 147 , 16l, 164
Actinobolzs spp. 36
Amphileptus procerus 36, 4l Askenasia acrostomia 36, 57, 148, 15l,
Actinobolus vorar I l8
A Ac c' tt ii nn öö hh oo ll uu ss p roir ti ufo nr dm usis I 212 AA mm pp h h i il le ep pt tu us s p tru an c c ht ea t I u i os i de4 2 s 232 Aske1 n5 a5, s i1 a6 1 chlorelligera 36, l4B, 149, l5l,
I 1
Actinorhabdos 252 Amp hi I e ptus trache loide s 232 154, 155, I 61, 162
amp hora, T intinnop si s 648 Askenasia elegans 154, 155
aculeata sapropelica, Stic'hotric'ha 48
aculeata, Stic hotric ha 48 a an nt ap bh a o e r n if a'o e r ,n 'L Pe s, eA Ls tt dy oI o lt az o p o lo n c a3 u7 lus 46, 51, 30, A Ass ll cc ee nn aa ss iaia . Hfa au lr te ei ri3 a6 yolyo-u 154
aa cc uun m'ti i nn aa tt aa ,, FD rip o nI e t ou nro ia s ty 4 l la 40 anas3 l, i5 o0 n1 o, u5 s0 2 4, 503 A As sk lce en na as sia s sp p. 4 p2 , 11 55 16 ,, 4 l633
, L t 3 ia . l, 162, 163, 555,
aac cu um mi in na at ta a, , L La ag ge yn nop o ph hr ry ys a 2 45 28 , 58, 258, 265 anastatica, Epistylis 31, 40, 5J, 452, 479, 560, 56J,570,606,609 \
515, 523,535, 536 Askenasia stellaris 36, 148, l5 l, 155, l6l
acumi nata, Lagynophrys 258
ac untinata, U rosoma 685 anastatic'a, Epistylis V otticella 5 l5 Askenasia volvox 36, 4l , 5J , 148, 150, l5 I ,
anastatic'a, Vorticella 5 1, 5 15 153, 154, 16l
177

Index
aspera, Colpoda 38 lB2, 183, 196 buetschlü, Disematostoma 30, 38, 40, 409,
Aspidisca 419 balbianii, Didinium 182, 196 414,431
Aspidisca cicada 36, 53 halbianii, Didinium M onodinium lB2 buetsc' hlii, G lossatella 41
Aspidisca costato 36 balbianii, Monodinium 44, 172, lJ9, 182, buetsc'hlii, Urozona 50
Aspidisca lynceus 36 190, I 91, l9B, I 99,202,203 bnl I inunt, Lentbadion 42
Aspidisca marsupia I is 36 balbianü, Monodinium balbianü 44, 58, bursa, Spathidiosus 4J
Aspidisca sulcata 36 17 B, 182, 190, 1 9 I ,, I 96, 202 Bursaria I14, 692, J l0
Aspidisca turrita 36 Balladina elongata 37 Bursat'ia Frontonia leucas 416
Aspidiscidae l2 B al lad i na f'u s iformi s 37 Bursaria leucas 416
Astomatida l2 Balladina parvula 37 Bursaria truncatella 37, 57, 683
a s ty liformi s, V ofüc e lla 486 Balladina sintilis 3J Bursaria yorticella 655
Astylozoon 316, 451, 453, 461,468, 480, Balladyna I l4 B ursari a vorti c:el la, C ondylostoma 655
482 balteatus, Euplotes 4l but"saria, Cyrtolophosis I lB,l2l
Asty I ozoo n amp horij t»'me 37 halti c'a, U ron"ic: ha 301 bursaria, Paramecium 21 , 45, 53, ll6, 17l,
Astylozoon enriquesi 37 , 455 harretti, Stentor 662 548
Astylozoon fallax 31, 453, 456 B elonophrya I 12, 124 Bursaridium 12, lB, 692,70g,732
Astylozoon faurei 37 , 452, 453, 455, 481 Belonophrya pelagica 30,3J,5J, l12, l13, B ursaridium di/I'i ci le 1 09, 1 l0
Astylozoon faurei complex 51 , 453, 455 115, ll8, 121,,123,124 Bursaridium pseudobursaria 30, 3J , 5J ,
Astylozoon oxypus 453 ben gal e nsi s, C hilodontopsis 3B 3J3, 656,683, 692,709
Astylozoon pyrifurme 3'7, 453, 454, 455, 456 bengalensis, Disematostonta 409, 414 Bursaridiunt schev,iakowii 7 l0
Astylozoon vagans 453, 456 bengalensis, P odophrya 46 Bursat'idiuru spp. 692
otrq, Frontonia 4l hic'audata, (Jrospina 50 Bnrsaricliunt Thylacicliunt pseuclobursaria
atra, Holophrya 42 hicot'onata, H olophrya 42 109
atra, Ophryoglena 44 hic'uspis, C oleps 38, 21 3, 280, 293 Bursaridiunt Thylakidium pscudohursaria
atte n uatus, Kahli le mbus 38, 42 biJurcata brevis, Halteria 554, 555, 556, 109
aurea, Nassula 44,'700 557 Bursella 371
aurea, Obertrumia 44, 30, 692,700 bifurcata, Halteria 41, 56, 58, 554, 559, Bursella H oloplu'ya gargamellae 383
aurelia, Paramec'iunt 45, 53, 58, I 16, l'73, 560, 563,566,569 B ut'se I la H ol opht'ya trnnt'ata 39 I
2'75 bimargi nata, E pistylis 450 Bursella spuntosa 372
austroliense, Spetazoon 262 hinuc'leatus, D ileptus 39 Bursellopsis 2J2, 324, 368, 371, 395, 39J ,
austra lis. P hiolinide s 268 hivac'uol ata, Cyrtolophosi s I 2l 399
bit,acttolata, Opisthonecta 45, 467, 468 Burselloltsi s gar gamellae 383
B biyacuolafus, Dileptus 39 B ursellopsis nigricans 31 2, 383
hivactto I um, V ortic'el la 495 Bursellopsis nigricans mobilis 3J , 5J , 3J l,
baitalius, Stentor 663 Bizonula parva 37 3J2,375,383, 384,387
Bai kalaster pe la gic us 37 Blepharisma 12 Bursellopsis nigricans nigricans 3J , 3J l,
baikalensis, Euplotes harpa 4l B I e p ha r i sma e I on gatum 3J 3J2,3J5,376,383, 387
B alanion 2'7 2, 363,'7 20 B lepharisma .japonicum 27 5 Bursellopsis pelagica 3J , 5l , 371,372, 375,
Balanion comanrn 363 B lephari sma lateritium 37 383,, 384,38J ,388, 390
Balanion planctonicum 29, 32, 37, 5'/, 345, B lepha ri sma musc:ulus 3l Bursellopsi s spaniopogon 39 l, 392, 393
348,352,363, 425 Blepharisnta steini 3J Bursellopsis spp. 30
B a I ani o n p I an kto n i c um 365 bloc'hma nni, F ur gasonia 58 Bursellopsis spumosa 37, 3Jl, 372, 3J5,
Balanion sp. 365,367 bodamicum, Histiobalantium 30, 42, 58, 384, 392
Balanitozoon agile 348 424,433 Bursellopsis truncata 3J , 325, 3J I , 3J 5,
B alanitozoo n ag i I is, U rott'ic' ha 348 boltoni, Folliculina 4l 3J8,383, 384,391
Balanitozoon gyrons 351, 352 hosminae, Vot'ticella 5 | bütsc'hli i, D i e sentatostonta 410
Balanonema dubium 50 Bolhrostonta 53, 553 bütsc'hl i i, D i sematostoma 409
Ba I anonema saprope Iica 37, 57 Bothrostoma undulans 3J
B a I a nop hrya ntant i I I ata 3'7 Botticula ringueleti 3l ,612
Balanophrya perni.r 37 Brac'honclla 53, 553 C
Balantidion 252 Brac' hone lla spiralis 37, 44, 5l caducus, P araclileptus 232, 234, 231
Ba I a nr id ion pel I ut i da, E nchel ys 252 brachykinetum, Rimostrombidium 4J, 58, Caenomorpha 53, 553
Balantidion pellucidum 37 ,252 596, 604, 606, 609, 6 I 0, 6l I, 615, 120 C ae n ontorp ha c' orl i s si 3J
Balantidium 12,252 brachyodon, P rorodon 46 Caenontorpha lata 37
Balantiophorus ninutus J l8 branc h i olthi I a, Epi sty I i s 40 Cae nontorpha I evanclet'i 3l
bo latonic'a, Epi sty li s 4O bt'andoni, Cyc'lidium 39, 46 Caenontorpha ntedusula 31
balbiani. M onodi ni um 182 Bresslauides 16 Caenontot'pha sapropelic'a 3l
balbianä balbianä, Monodinium 44, 58, brevipcs, Rhabdostyla 47 Caenontorpha uniserialis 37, 57
t18, 182, 190, r9r, 196, 202 brevipoda, P odophrya 46 c'alkinsi, P aramecium 45
balbianä breviproboscis, Monodinium 44, breviproboscis, Monodinium balbianü 44, C alyptott'i c ha chlorel li gera 37
178,182,183, 190, 196, 198, 199 l78, 182, lB3, 190, 196, l9B,l99 C alyptott'i c' lta Ianu gi nosa 3J
halhianii nanum, Monodiniunt 185 brevis, Halteria hif'urc'ata 554, 555, 556, Campanella umbellaria 3J , 40, 452, 468
ba I hi anii p erri e ri, D idi nium 202 557 campanel la, S pathidium 4l
bolbianii rostratun, Didinium 196 hrevi st)t I a, V ortic e lla 5 | ('ampanula, Vortic'ella 3 1, 5 l, 53, 59
balbianä rostrdtum, Monodinium 44, 58, brunneunt, Cyc'lotrichium 39, 206 campylum, Colpidium 38
118

Index
campylum, Deriostoma 38, 39, ll3, lB4 chlorelligerum, Monodinium 44, 58, 167, Coleps spetai 2J, 29, 38, 2J2, 273, 279,
canellai, P aradileptus 232, 234, 235 lB2, lB3, 1BJ , 19l, I 96, 198,202 2Bl, 284, 285, 28J, 288, 292, 293
capuc' i na, C hi I odo ne lla 3J c' h I oro I I i g e r un1, D idi n i u nt | 6l Coleps striatus 38
carc'he sii, Tohophrya 49, 526 c'hloro sti gnta, V ortic' e lla 49 l, 492 Coleps tric:hotus 38
Carchesiuru 508,535 Chonotrichida 12 Coleps unc'inatus 3B
C arc'hesium lac ltntanni 3J chrysali s, P leuronema 46 Coleps viridis 38,284
Carc:hesium lintnetic'um 37, 508 cic'ada, Aspidisca 36, 53 c'ol I ari s, Ac'aryop hrya 36
Cart'hesium pectinatum 37, 508 cienkowsl<,ii, U rosznta 50, 612 c: olp idi oide s, W e n r i c' hia 5 I
Carc'hesium polypinum 31, 53, 450, 468 c' inc'tum, D idinium 213 c' olpi d i op si s, D exi otric' ha 39
C arc: he sium py gntae um 535 t'inc'tunt, M esodinium 139, 140 Colpidium 9,12
C arc' he s i unt s p e c' tab i I e 3l cinctum, Pelagovasicola 45, 39, 205, 206, Colpidium campyluru 38
Carc:hesium Zoothamnium pe ctinatum 508 213 C olpidium c'olpoda 38, 53 , 212
C a rdio stomate I I a v e rmifo rm e 37 cinereus, Prorodon 46 Colpidiunt kleini 5l
c'arinatus, Euplotes 4l Cinetochilum ruargaritaceum 38, 53, 57, Colpidium spp. 173
c'at'inatus, Litonotus 43 2J 5, 607 ,120 Colpoda 12, 16, 49, | 14, 692,714
t' arpath i c' a, l\,1 a s s ula 44 c' it'rif'era, H al te ria 566 Colpoda aspera 38
castalia, Urotricha 50, 58, 301, 302, 303, cirriJ'era, H alteria grandinella 566 Colpoda c'uc'ullus 38, 53
309 , 3 1 0, 3 I I , 3 13 , 325 , 335, 340, 342 cirrifera, Pelagohalteria 45, 56, 58, 559, Colpoda dragesc'oi I14
ca udata, Lac'ryruaria 42 566 Colpoda duodenaria I l4
c'audata, Marituja 43, 431 , 432 c'itrea, Nassula 44 Colpoda ec'audata J l4
t'audata, Spirozona 48 c: itr i na, V o rt i c: e lla 5 I Colpoda inflata 38
t'audatum, Condylostonta 38, 656 c'itrullus, C y clidiunt 39 Colpoda maupasi 38
cattdatum, Paramecium 45,53, 173, lJ4, claparede, Strontbidi nopsis 48 C ol poda reniJ'ornzrs JB
215 c'laparedii, Antphil eptus 36 Colpoda sp. 173
caudatum, S p i rostomunt 4J Clathratostoma ovum 38 Colpoda steini I l4
caudatum, Strohilidiunt 48, 53, 58, 432, Clathrostonta 409 Colpoda steinii 38, 692, 714
553, 5J8,586, 595,596,604, 605 Clathrostorua Leuc'ophrys ovum 409 Colpoda steinii piekarskii l ll
c'audatus, Paruroleptus 45 c' I avar i oi d e s, Lac' rymar i a 42 colpoda , C olpidium 38, 53 , 272
caudatus, Stentor 662 c' lava tunt, T rac: he I op hy I I um 49 Colpodea 54, 692,709 '
centrale, Cyclidium 39 c I e p s i n if'o rn1 e, E nc' h e ly d i um 40 Colpodet ea 54
t' e ntrali s, D ex i ott"i c ha 39 C lintaco stomum emar gi natum 38 colpodids 12, 16, I B, 54, J3l
c e ntra I i s, D exi ott' i c ltide s 39 Climac'ostomum virens 38, 656 c' o ma tunt, B al a n i o n 363
Cercaria hirta 213 c' oa r c ta la, O p e r c' ul ari a 44 conleta, Srrobil id i um 48
Chaenea limnic'ola 3l Codonella 553, 617 conlzsa, S ulci get'a 49
Chaenea stricla 3J Codonella craterA 4, 38, 49, 5J, 617, 62J, c' ompl anatlts, H i stri c' ulus 42
Chaenea tere s 3J 636, 638, 643, 648, 649, 650, 652 compl etum, Rha gadostonta 4J
charon, Euplotes 4l Codonella c'ratet'a reticulata 38 complex, Astylozoon faurei 57 , 453, 455
C h a sntato s to m a r e n ifornt e 3J Codonella Difflugia Tintinnus c'ratera 6lJ complex , Stylonychia mytilus 49, 53, 685
chilense, Trac' he lophyll um 49 C odone I la lac:ustris 6ll complex, Tetrahyntena pyrif'ormis 41, 49,
Chilodon dentatus 37 codonellids 265 119
Chilodonella 12,692 coeruleus, Stentor 48,53, 58, 656, 663,6J l, complex, Vorticella aquadulcis 5l , 59, 450,
C hi I odone I la capuc'ina 37 612 452, 486, 495
C hilodone lla c ucullulus 3l C o h n i I e ntbu s J'us ifornt i s 38 complex, Vot'tic'ella c'onvallaria 51, 53 , 59,
Chilodonella dentata 3J ,38 C ohnilentbus pusillus 38 495
C hil odo n e I I a .fl uv iari I i s 38 Cohnilentbus verntinus 38, 43 complex , Vorticella inf'usionum 51, 487
C hil oclonella ste i ni 38 Coleps 12, 2J2, 273, 274, 292, 29J, 419, complex , Vorticella ntic'r'ostoma 51, 53 ,487
Chilodonella unc'inata 38, 53 618 complex , Vorticella oc'tava 51, 48J
C hilodontopsis 12 Coleps antphac:anthus 38, 2J3, 276, 292, compressa, Ac'ine ta 36
C hi lodontops i s be n gal e nsis 3B 293,299 compre s sunl, T r i nty e nta 50
C hilodontopsis depressa 38 C oleps bi cuspi s 38, 21 3, 280, 293 t'o n c hoi d e s, Lemhad i o n 42
C hilodontopsis elongata 38 Coleps elongatus 38, 5J, 2J3, 292, 297 C onclylostoma 655, 656, 660
C hilodontops i s vorax 38 Coleps hirtus ll3, 2731 284,288, 292,293, Condylostoma Bursaria vorticella 655
c hlamy dop h o ra, P s e ud ov o t't i t' e I la 452 294,297 ,299 C ondylostoma caudatum 38, 656
chlorellata, Vorticella 51, 480, 482, 491, Coleps hirtus hirtus 2J , 38, 273, 284, 285, Condylostoma kasymovi 38, 656
502,503 287 , 293, 291 , 298 C ondyl ostoma I uteum 656
chlorelligera, Askenasia 36, 148, 149,I51, Coleps hirtus lac'ustt'is 38 C ondylostoma ntagnum 38
154, 155, I 61, 162 Coleps hirtus minor 38, 280 C ondylostonta ni gra 656
chlorelli ge ra, C alyptotric ha 3l Coleps hirtus virids 4,2J,38, 57,273,2J5, Condylostoma stagnale 655, 656
chlorelligera, Halteria 554,555, 560, 569 281,284,288 Conclylostoma tardum 38, 656
chlore I Iigera, Orytricha 45 C ol e p s i nc'ut'rlus 38, 299 Condylostoma terricola 655, 656
chlorelligera, Pelagothrix 45, 58, 302, 325, C oleps nolandi 38, 2l3 , 2J 4, 2J 9 , 2Bl , 284, Condylostoma vorax 656
341 , 342, 395, 402 292,293, 297 C ondyl ostonta vortic'ella 38, 655
c'hl ore I I i ge ra, V ortic' e I la mar garitata 492 Coleps oc'tospinus 3B condylostomids 655, 656
chlorelligerum, Didinium 39, 57 , 167 , lJ | , C o I e p s c1 uadr i s1t i n u s 299 c onfu ni s, .l a n kow,sliia 42
183, 196, 198,202,203 Coleps sp.284,601,120 ' congre gata, Rhabclostyla 47
179

Index
co nicoide s, Sn"omhidium 48 Cyc:lidium 16, 348, 352, 351, 360 D
c o nicum, H ypotric hidium 42, 553, 677 Cyclidium brandoni 39, 46 Dac'tyloc:hlamys 112
conicum, Rimosn"omhidium 609, 6l l, 613 Cyclidium centrale 39 daidaleos , Euplotes 41 , 4l I
conicum. Strobilidium 48 Cyclidium citrullus 39
daphniae, Epistylis 40
toni t us. P arad i I ept u s 22 l. 222. 223. 225 C y c I idium dil e c ati s s imum 39 daphnic' ola, M etacy sti s 43
conipe s, Rhabdosty la 47 Cyclidium elongatum 39 daphnides, Metopus 44
conochili, Vorticella 3l , 5l C y c I idium fl a g e llatum 39 davidofl'ii c'ylindric'a minima, Tintinnopsis
conosoma, V ortic'e lla 5 I Cyclidium glaucoma 39, 53, 57
49
cc'o nn ts op ri tt u'u su s U, H e li po tc uo sm e 0te s 4l C y c l i id di iu um mhe usp t ca it cr i oc lh au m 39 d ee nlic t: aa tt ais s Cim hiu lom d, S t ero llm b 31id ,i 3um 48
o , ro le 5 C y c' I m 39 d , o n a 8
contractilis, P hascolodon 45, 693 Cyclidium oli gotrichum 39 dentatunt, Saprodinium 4l
conus,Tintinnopsis 49 Cyclidium porcatum 39
dentatus,Chilodon3l
convallaria complex, Vorticella 51, 53, 59, Cyclidium setiger 39
depre ssa, C hilodontopsis 38
495 Cyclidium sp. 59,120 depressa, Frontonia 4l
c o nva I I aria natans, V orti c e I la 482 Cyclidium spp. 561 Dexiostoma campylum 38, 39, ll3, lB4
t'onvallaria, Vorticella 450, 495 Cyclidium versatile 39
c'ordiformis, Meseres 43 cyc lidium, P leuronema 46 D exiotri c'ha c e ntral i s 39
corlissi, C aenomorpha 37 c'y c' li ndromorphun, Str omhidium 48 D D e e x xi io ot tr ri icc hh aa gc' o ralp n i ud li oo sp as i 3s 9 3 , 9 43
corliss i, Te trahyme na 49 C y c' I o gramma lateritia 39 Dexiotric'ha sp.59
corIissiana, U rotrit ha 359, 360 cyclopicola, Rhabdostyla 535 D exiotricha tranquilla 57
c oronotum, P le urone ma 46, 58, 424 c'y clopic ola, V ortic e lla 5 | D exiotric: hia plagia 39
co rp ule ntissimum, P rorodon 46 cyclopis, Rhabdostyla 535 D eriotric'hide s c e ntralis 39
costata, Aspidist'a 36 Cycloposthium 12
Dexiotrichides sp. 59
c ostata, V ortice lla 486 cyclopwm, Podophrya 46 diaptomus, Tr"ichodina domer guei 47 3
costata, Vorticella octava 486 cy'c I o p um, T o kop hry a 49 D ichilum plate ssoides 39
Cothurnia 53'7 Cyclotrichida 1 1 1 dichotonta, Epistylis lac:ustris 5 ll
Cothurnia annulata 38 Cyclotrichium 205, 213 , 3l3 Didesmis 12
C othurnia crystallina 38 C y c lotric hium brunne um 39, 206 Didiniidae I 64
Cothurnia imberhis 38 Cyclotrichium faurei 36, 39, 206, 214, 215 Didinium 12,30, l1l, l4B, 151, 155, 167,
Cothurnia incisa 38 Cyclotrichium gigas 39
17 B, 206
Cothurnia lobata 38 Cyclotrichium humilis 39, 206
D idiniunt alve olatum lJ B
Cothurnia nodosa 38 C y c I ot r i c hium i nflatum 39 Didinium armatum 19l
cothurnioide s, Pyxidium 47 Cyclotrichium limneticum 39, 205, 206, Didinium balbianii lB2, 196
Cothurniopsis vaga 39 201 ,213 Didinium balhianii perrieri 202
Coxliella Cyttarocylis helix 39 C y c I otr ic hium ltmne tic um 205 Didinium balbianii rostt'atum 196
C crao sx sli ae ,l la M eh te al cix y sm tisin i 4m 3a 39 C C y y c c I l oo ttr r ii cc hh ii uu mm p s pe .c t 5in 9atum 39 Didinium chlorelligerum 39, 5J , 167 , lJ I ,
crassa, SoIenophrya 47 C yclotrichium sphaericum 39 D idi 1 n 8 iu3 m, I 9 t' h6 l, o 1 ro9 l8 li, 2 g0 e2 ru,2 n0 t 3 | 67
cras sicaule, Ophrydium 44 Cyclotrichium spp. 206
Didinium c'inctum 213
c ra s s i.st i I at a, O p i st hor r ic h a 45 Cyclotrichium vernalis 439 Didiniunt.faurei 213
c ra s s i sti lata, O tTtri c ha 45 Cyclotrichium vernalis, Stokesia 439 Didinium gargantua lJ l, 173
c ('rr aa ss ss uu mm ,, SPl te rou nro gn ye lim dia m4 6 Cyc 3l 1o 3tr ,i c 4h 3iu 2m viride 'n39 , 205, 213 , 214, DD ii dd ii nn ii uu mnt mim inp ir mes us mu m 9191
u 48
3
cratera reticulata, Codonella 38 ('ygnus, Dileptus 39
Didinium Monodinium balbianii lB2
cratera, Codonella 4, 38, 49, 51 , 617, 627 , ('yg,nus, Litonotus 43, 53 Didinium nasutum 2J,39,57, 167, 168,
crat6 e3 ra6, , 6 C3 o8 d, o 6 n4 e3 ll, a 6 D48 ff, i u64 g9 ia, 6 T5 in0 t, i n6 n5 u2 s 6l'7 cylin 6d 4r 2a ,t 6a 4, 3T ,6in 4t 8innopsis 49, 62J, 636,638, l7l, lB2, lB3, 1 84, lB9, 215
Didinium nasutum rostatum 196
cratera, Dffiugict 617 cylindrica minima, Tintinnopsis davidffii Didinium spp. 39, ll\,204
cratera, Tintinnop sis 49 49
Cristigera minuta 39 cylindrica, Rhabdostyla 535, 538 D di Ji Je 's ic e ' in let ,a to B us rto sm ara id h iu ü mt s L' 7h 0I i 9 i ,4 71 l0 0
Cristigera phoenix 39, 57 cylindrica, Tintinnidium fluviatile 49, 628,
Cristigera setosa 39 631 ,638 Dd if ff fi iuc' i g I e ia, S c a 'p ra r t o e d ra i n 6i u 1r 7u 4J
Crobylura pelagica 39 cy lindr ic a, T i nti nnop s i s 648 Diffiugia Tintinnus t'ratera, Codonella 6ll
CrTptochilum ni gricans 39 Cyrtolophosis 692,718
digitalis, Epistylis 40, 452,5 16, 523, 536
t' rystallina, C othurnia 38 Cyrtolophosis bivacuolata I 2l digitalis, Hydra 523
t'rystallina, Vaginit'ola 31, 50 Cyrtolophosis bursaria I lB,l2l
Ctedoctema acanthocrJptum 39, 5J Cyrtolophosis elongata I lB,l2l di,qitatus, Sty loc omete s 48
cucullulae, Trithigmostom etum 692 Cyrtolophosis major I lB,l2l dilatata, V ortic' e lla 5 I
c uc ul lulus, C hi lodo ne I Ia 37 Cyrtolophosis mucicola 39, 60J , 692,718 d di rl lee c p: ta it di s 2s 3im 2um, C y c' lid ium 39
cucullulus, Trithigmostoma 37 , 50, 53, 692 cyrtonucleata, U rotricha 301
Dileptin a 238
cucullus, Colpoda 38, 53 Cyrtophoret ea 692
Dileptus 232,233
culex, Espe.joa 546 Cyrtophorida 12, 54, 692, 693
Dileptus anser 39, 53, 2J 5
cup ift ra, V orti c e I I a 5 I cyrtophorids 692, J32 D ileptus binuc le atus 39
L'urvatus, Metopus 44 Cyttarocylis helix, Coxliella 39
D ileptus hivac'uolatus 39
c'uspidata, Acineta 36
780

Index
Dileptus cygnus 39 elegans, Askenasia 154, 155 E,1ti styl i s bi nta r gi nata 450
D i I eptus c I e p hanti nu s 221 elegans, E,pistylis 40 Epistylis branchiophila 40
Dileptus elephantinus, P aradileptus 221 elegans, Lacrynruria 42 E,pistylis daphniae 40
D i I e p tus .fa I c iJ'o r ntis 3 9 elegans, Lagynus 42,58 Epistylis digitalis 40, 452,516, 523, 536
Dileptus gigas 39 e legans, Nassula 44 E,pistylis elegans 40
Dileptus .jonesi 39 ale gans, N assulopsis 44, 7 0l E,pistylis ant:ii 40
D i leptus mar gat'itif'e r 40 elegans, Staurophrya 48, I23 , J 25 , 7 27 E p i s ty I i s .f'l u i ra n s 40
D il eptus n'toni latus 40 elegans, Ste ntor 662 E,pistylis galea 40
Dileptus ntoniliger 40 ele gans, Zoothantnium 52 Episrylis gelcii 57
D ileptus saaleri 232, 234, 235 e lephanti nus, D ileptus 221 E,pistyl i s i nva gi nata 40
Dileptus spiralis 40 elephantinus, Paradileptus 30, 45, 53, 58, Epistylis it're gularis 40
Dileptus trachelioides 40, 232 221,234, 546 Epistylis lacustris 40, 5 l5
D i I e ptus trac lte I i oi d e s, Amp hi I e lttu s 232 elephantinus, P aradilelttus Dileptus 221 E,pi styl i s lacustri s dic:holonta 5 ll
Dimacrocaryon 233 E llohiop hrya donac'i s 40 Epistylis lacustt'is magna 5 15, 5 16
dintorp ha, V ortic:e I la 5 | elongata, Balladina 3J E,pistylis lacustt'is rugoso 523
D inophrya li eberkue ltni i 40 elongata, C hil odontopsi s 38 E,pistylis nutans 40
D inop ltrya lieberkii hni 213, 21 4 elongata, Cyrtolopltosis I 18,721 Epistylis nyntphat'unt 40, 5 15, 5 16, 5 19,
Diophrys sc'utunt 40 elon gatum, B lepharisma 3J 521, 522
D ip I e ur o sty la ac urn i nata 40 e I ongatum, C yc'l idium 39 E,pistylis ot,nm 535
disc'olor, H olophrya 42, 46, 53, 325 elongatus, C oleps 3 B, 5l , 27 3 , 292, 29J E,pistylis plicatilis 40, 53, 452
discolor, Prorodon 46 elongatus, Lentbus 43 Epistylis procumbens 4, 40, 5J, 450, 509,
D iscomrtrpha pecti nata 40 e mat' g i nat unt, C I i m a t' ct s tomum 38 527
Disc'ontorphella 53 E nche lydi um c:I ep sinif'orme 40 Epistylis puarneri 516
D i s c' omo rp h e I la p e c'ti nata 40 Enchelyidae 252 Epistylis pygmaeum 30, 40, 4J, 57, 450,
Discophrya 36 Enchelyodon armatus 40 535
Disematostoma 409, 443, 444 Enc he ly odo n ntonilatus 40 E,pistylis pyrif'ormis 40, 535
D isentalostoma he n gale nsis 409, 41 4 Enchelyodon ovum 252, 253,254 E,pistylis rotans 40, 521
Disematostoma buetschlü 30, 38, 40, 409, E,nc'helyomorpha 53, I 12 E,pi sty li s rotatori um 535
414,431 E nc'helyomorpha verruiculari s 40 E,pisrylis spp. 452
D isematostonta bütsc hlii 409 Enchelys 12,252,254 E,pi stylis umbe llaria 40 '
Disematostoma gyrans 409 Enchelys arcuata 40 E,pi styli s ut'ce olata 40
Disematostoma invallatum 409, 413, 414 E,nche lys Balantidion pelluc'ida 252 Epistylis variabilis 40, 5 l6
Disentatostoma Leucophrys tetraedric'a 414 Encltelys gasterosteus 40, 254 E,pi styl i s V orti c e I I a ana stati ca 5 | 5
Disematostoma minor 409, 413, 414 E,nc' he lys microstoma 40 Epistylis zschokkei 4l
Disematostoma tetraedrica 414 Enchelys mutans 252 e p izoi t' us, H ap I o c aul u s 4BJ
Disematostoma tetraedricum 40, 409, 414, E, nc' he I y s p e I I u c' i da 252, 253 e s, Metopus 44, 441
431, 440 Enchelys pupa 40,254 Espejoa c'uler 546
dispar, Uroleptus 50 E nc'helys simplex 40, 254 e ste nsis, P aradil eptus 221, 222, 226
doruer guei diaptonTus, Tric:hodina 41 3 Enc'helys sp. 253 e u g I e nit' ora, O xy tr i c: ha 45
domerguei domet'gue i, Tric'hodina 47 4 E,nc helys t,ermiculari s 40 c u g I e n it' ora, T r i c: h op e I nt a 50
domerguai nte gamicronuc'leata, Tric'hodina E,ndospltaera engelmanni 468 E,uplotes 16, 30
49,58,4J2,413,479 e n ge I ma n n i, E ndosp hae ra 468 E,uplotes aediculatus 4l
domerguei, Tric'hodina 412, 413 enriquesi, Astylozoon 37, 455 E,uplotes affinis 4l
domerguei, Tricltodina doruerguei 41 4 Entodiniomorphida 12 E,uplotes balteatus 4l
donacis, Ellobiophrya 40 entzii, Epistylis 40 Euplotes carinatus 4l
dragescoi, Colpoda I 14 E,palxella 12,53 E,uplotes charon 4l
dragescoi, (J rotricha 50, 359, 360, 361 E,palxella erigua 40 Euplotes daidaleos 4l, 4l I
Drepanonlonas exigua 40 E,palxe I la ntirabil i s 40 E,uplotes eurystontus 4l
dubia, Rhabdostyla 535, 536 E palxel Ia oli gotric'ha 40 E,uplotes gracilis 4l
dubium, Balanonema 50 Epalxella sp. 59 Euplotes ltarpa 4l
duhium, Uronenta 50 E,palxella spinosa 40 E,uplotes harpa baikalenszs 41
duhius, P seudontict'othorar 46 E,palxella striata 4tJ Euplotes moebiusi 4l
duodcnaria, Colltoda J l4 Epenat'dia myriophyl I i 4l Euplotes muscit'ola 4l
D y ste r i a .fluv iati I is 40 ephemeridum, Tintinnidium 49, 62J, 636, E uplotes noverucarinatus 4l
Dysteria ruarina 40 649, 651 E,uplotes patella 41, 53, 57
Dysteria nayicula 40 Epicarchesium 452, 508 Euplotes patelIa planktonicus 4l
Dysteri a proraeJi'o ns 40 E pi c' at'c lte s i uru gra tt u I atum 508 E,uplotes lrisulcatus 4l
Epicarchesium pectinatum 3J , 40,52, 50g, E,uplotidae 12
527,528 eurystontus, Euplotes 4l
E epi stylide s, Tric'ltophrya 50 Eutintinrtus pectinis 35, 36
ec'audata, Colpoda I 14 epistylidis , (J rnula 50 eutrophicum, Ophrydium 44,56, 540, 543,
eichhorni, O pht'ydi uru 44 Epistylis 450, 515 544,551
e latunt, S trontbidium 48 Epistylis anastatica 31, 40, 5J, 452, 47g, erigtta, Drepanontonas 40
el efanti nus, P aradi I eptus 223 515, 523,535, 536 erigua, E,palxella 40
elegans, Acineta 36 Epistylis balatonica 40 . exigua, Metacystis 43
78r

Index
oxigua, Nassula 44 Frontonia 12,30, 416, 443,733 globosunt, I socyc'Iidium 42
F rontonia ac untinata 4l Gl ossate I la buetsc'hlii 4l
Frontonia angusta 4l Glossatalla tintinnabulum 4l
F
Frontonia angusta 41, 5J gracilis, Apsilcn'aru 42, 5J
Fabrea salina 4l Frontonia arenaria 4l gracilis, E,uplotes 4l
.f'alc iJb r m i s, D i I e p tus 39 Frontonia atra 4l gracilis, H olopht'ya 42
fallax, Astylozoon 37 , 453, 456 Frontonia depressa 4l graci li s, O hertruntia I 0l
.fallat, Oxyn'icha 45 Frontonia leucas 41,30, 5J ,272, 416, 441 gracilis, Vorticella 5l
fallax, Pelagostrombidium 4, 35, 45, 58, Frontonia leucas, Bursaria 416 gt'arrdinel la cirrif'e ra, H a lteria 566
57 4, 577,58 l, 585, 590, 591, 592 Frontonia marina 4l grandinella, Halteria 2J , 41, I I 4, l16, 142,
.fallax, P si Iotric' ha 585 Frontonia nigric'ans 4l 173,310, 432, 554,555, 556, 559, 566,
fal I ax, S tt'om hi dium P si lotri t' ha 585 Frontonia rocluei 4l 5J0,573,601,120
farcta, Urotricha 50, 59, 351, 351, 360, 432 Frontonia sp. 173 grandi n e I la, T ri c hodi na 559
farctus, P seudoprorodon 46 Frontonia spp. 409,414 grandis, Acineta 36
.fascit' ulata, P se udovortic e I la 5 l, 492 Frontonia v,ernalis 41, 416 grandis, Litonotus 43
.fas t' it: ulata, V o r t ic e I la 5 | furcata, arotricha 50, 59, 344, 34J, 348, grandi s, O nyc' hodrontu s 44
.fas c' i o la, Lit on ot us 43 352, 357 , 360, 365, 607 , 120 grandis, P leurotricha 46
.fas t' i o la, Loxop hy I I um 43 Furgasonia 12 gt'andis,lJrostyla 50
faurei complex, Astylozoon 57, 453, 455 F ut'gasonia bloc'hmanni 58 granulatunt, E pit'arc he si unt 508
.faurei, Askenasia 36 Fut'gasonia ruhens 4l granulosa, Dexiotricha 39, 43
faurei, Astylozoon 37, 452, 453, 455, 481 Furgasonia viridis 4l Gymnostomatea 54,lll
faurei, Cyt' lotric'hium 36, 39, 206, 214, 21 5 Fusc'heria 252 Gymnostomatida I I l, 212
.faurei, Didinium 213 .f'ust'us, M etopus 44 gymnostomatids 16l, 555, 560, 567,5J0,
.t''a ur e i, H y p o n' i c h id i um 683 J'usidens, H emiophrys 4l 131,732
faurei, Lagynus 252 fuside ns, La gy nophrya 258, 259 gymnostomes 54,59
faurei, Pelagotrichiliam 45, 553, 656,611, Jusidens, Litonotus 41, 43 gyrans, Balanitozoot't 35 l, 352
683 fusiformis minima, Tintinnopsis lobiancoi g))rans, D i sematostoma 409
faurei, Spathidium 47 49 g))rans, Strobilidium 48
faurei, U rotricha 301, 335, 336, 34O, 342 Jusif'ornti s, Balladina 3l gyrans, Strombidinopsi s 48
ferruginea, O xytricha 45 .fus ifo r nt i s, C o hn i I e ntbus 38 gyrans, Stronthidium 48
Filicorticata I I I fusifornti s, T intinnopsi s 648, 65 I
filum, Spirostomum 47
H
.fimbriatum, Mesodinium 135, 136, 137,138,
140 G halophila, (Jronema 50
fixa, Podophrya 46 Gajewskajophrya 725 Halteria 9, 12, 16, 30, 119, 134, 136, l3J,
flage llatum, Cyclidium 39 Gajewskajophrya melosirae 30, 41, 723, 140, l4l, l4B, 151, 155,461,553,554,
.fl age llatus, P aradileptus 221, 222, 224, 234 J24, 725, 127 568, 569, 57 l, 595, 59J , 604, 678
flava, Acineta 36 galea, E,pistylis 40 H alteria bifurcata 4l , 56, 5 B, 554, 559 ,
flava, Longitt'icha 43, 368,369 gallinulus, Stentor 48 560, 563,566,569
flava, Ophryoglena 44 gandolfii, Lionotus 43 Halteria hifut'c'ata brevis 554,555, 556,551
fl avicans, O phryo gle na 44 gar ganle I lae, Bursella H ol ophrya 383 Halteria chlorelligera 554,555, 560, 569
fl avi can s, Tra c h e I op hy I I um 49 gar game I lae, B ursellopsis 383 H alte ria ci rrif'era 566
JI e xi I i s, O n yc hodromops i s 44 gargamella, Holophrya 383, 384, 385 Halteria grandinella 27, 41, l14, I 16, 142,
.fl exilis, P odophrya 526 garganel lae, Prorodon 46 ll3, 310, 432, 554, 555, 556, 559, 566,
fluitans, Epistylis 40 gargantua, Didinium ll l, ll3 5J0,5J3,601,120
fluviatile cylindrica, Tintinnidium 49, 628, gasteroste Lts, E,nc: he ly s 40, 254 H alteria grandinella cirrifera 566
637,638 Gastrostyla ntystac'ea 41, 42 Halteria oblonga 4l
fluviati I e mi nima, Tintinnidi um 49 Gastrostyla steinii 4l Halteria pulex 139
Jluviatile, Tintinnidium 4,35,49, 626, 621, geleii, Epistylis 57 H alteria puler, M esodinium 139
637 , 642, 643, 644, 650 ge I e ii, H ypotrichidiunt 6l B Halteria spp. 567, 569, 510
.fl uviat i Ii s, C hi I odone I la 38 geor giana, Obertrumia 7 00, 7 0l Halteria tenuic'ollis 139. 140
fl uv iat i li s, D y ste r i a 40 Gerda glans 4l Halteria yolyox 4l
fl uviat i Ii s, H ap loc aulu s 487 gi gas, C yc' I otri chium 39 Halteria volvox, Askenasia 154
fluv iatilis, Le ucophrys 43 gigas, Dileptus 39 halteriids 56, 586, 606, 609, 611
fl uv iati I i s, T i n ti n nidi um 637 glans, Gerda 4l halteri iformis, U rotric ha 50
Jluviati lis, Tintinnus 637 Glauc'onta 12 H aplocanlus 452, 486, 50 1
Foissneria viridis 41 G lauconta .fi'ontara 4l H aplocaulus epizoi t'us 4Bl
foliginosus, Stentor 662, 664, 665 Glauc'onta macrostoma 4l H ap I ocau I u s .fl uv i at i I i s 481
folliculata, Thuricola 49 Glauc'onta ntyriophylli 4l Haplocaulus pelagic'us 41,, 5 1
Folliculina 12 G lauconta pyriformis 4l haplostoma, H olophrya 42
F ollic'ulina boltoni 4l Glauc:onta sc'intillans 41,27 4 Haptorida 12, lll,433
fo rmo s a, T i nti nno p s i s 49 Glauc'onta setosa 4l haptorids l6l
fornici s, Le pidotrac he lop hy I lum 262 glauc'onta, Cyclidiunt 39, 53, 5J hat'pa bailcalensis, ELtplotes 4l
fro me nte I i, V o rt ic e lla 5 I globosa, Urotricha 50, 352, 357 harpa, Euplotes 4l
frontata, Glaucomo 41 globo sa, V ot'tic e lla 5 I Hastatella 451, 458, 460
182

Index
Hastatella aesculacantha 41, 461 H olophrya saginata 42 irre gulari s, E,pistyl is 40
Hastatella microradians 460, 461, 462 Holophrya simplex 42, 53,310 I socyc'lidium globosum 42
Hastatella radians 30, 41, 450, 453, 456, Holophrya teres 42, 46, 59
458, 460 Holophrya truncata 391
J
hele nae, Acaryophrya 36 Holophrya trunc:ata, Bursella 391
H eliocometes conspicuus 4l Holophryidae 395 .l a nlcow,ski a c' o nf'uni s 42
helix minima, Coxliella 39 holophryids I l, l8 .l ankov'skia mohi li s 42
helix, Coxliella Cyttarocylis 39 Holosticha kessleri 42 j ap o ni c:unt, B I e p har i snta 2J 5
helus, Loxophyllum 43 Holosticha monilata 42 jonesi, Dileptus 39
Hemiophrys aselli 4l Holosticha mystacea 42
Hemiophrys fusidens 4l H olosticha pullaster 42 K
Hemiophrys procera 4l Homalozoon vermiculare 42, 58 lcahli, Ohertrumia l0l
Hemiophrys punctata 42 Homotricha 1 11
lcahli, Vorticella 486
henne guy, Opisthonecta 46J H oplirophrya 12
kahlä, Vorticella 486
henneguyi, Opisthonecta 45,, 453, 456, 467 humile, Rimostrombidium 4J,48, 58, 596,
henne guyi , Telotrochidium 461 604, 606, 60J , 609, 6ll Kahlilenthus attenuatus 38, 42
he ptatr ic hum, C y c I idium 39 humile , Strobilidium 48, 6l I karaj ac: e nsis minima, Ti ntinnop si s 49
Heterotrichida 12, 54,553, 655, 692 humilis, Cyclotrichium 39, 206 kara.f ac ensis, Ti nti nnopsi s 49
Karyorelictea 553,132
heterotrichs 16, 18, 553,732 hyalina, Vorticella 5l , 495
Karyorelictida 12,54
hh ee xx aa tk rii cn e htu a,m H, oS lt oro pb hi rl yid ai u 4m 606,, 607 hhy ya al li in nu um m, O Rp imhr oy sd ti ru om b5 i4 d3 iu, m54 4 4, J5 ,4 5 Karyorelictidetea 54
2 , m 604, 606,,
hirta, Cercaria 2J3 609,61 l, 615 karyorelictids 54
kasymovi, Condylostoma 38, 656
hirtus, Coleps lJ 3, 273, 284, 288,, 292, 293, hyalinum, S trobilidium 609
Kerona 473
294,291 ,299 hyalinus, Metopus 44
K erona pe dic'ulus 42, 4'/ 3
hirtus, Coleps hirtus 2J, 38, 273, 284, 285, Hyalophysa 12
Keronopsis ntonilata 42
zBJ , 293, 291 , 298 Hydra digitalis 523
hirtus hirtus, Coleps 2J, 38, 273, 284, 285, Hymenostomata 54, 272, 409 Keronopsi s ntus c: orum 42
Keronopsis rubra 42
287 , 293, 291 , 298 hymenostomes 16, lB, 53 ,2J2,,440,133 kessleri, H olophrya 252
hirtus lacustris, Coleps 38 Hypotrichia 54, 553, 677
kessleri, H olosticha 42
hirtus minor, Coleps 38, 280 Hypotrichida 12
lcleini, Colpidium 5J
hirtus virids, Coleps 4,,27,38, 57,2J3,275, Hypotrichidium 553, 677 , 685
28r,284,288 Hypotrichidium africanum 6ll , 6lB Komplex, V ortic ella aquadulcis - 486
Histiobalantium 12, 2J 2, 424, 1 33 Hypotrichidium conicum 42, 553, 677
Histiobalantium bodamicum 30, 42, 58, H ypotric hidium faur e i 683 L
424,433 H ypotrichidium geleii 67 B labiatunt, S tron gylidiunt 48
H istiobalantium maj us 424 Hypotrichidium spp. 683 lac hntan ni, C arc h e s i um 37
H i stiobalantium marinum 424 Hypotrichidium tisiae 6ll ,, 619 Lac'rymaria 265,268
H istiobalantium minor 424 hypotrichs I 1, 16, 18, 20, 54, 553, 731,732, Lacrymaria caudata 42
H istiobalantium natans 42, 424 -,t-a33 Lac: ry mar i a c' I av ar i o i d e s 42
Histiobalantium sp. 59, 424, 425, 433 Lacrymaria elegans 42
H istiohalantium viridis 42 I Lacryntaria la ge nula 42
H istriculus complanatus 42 Lacrymaria minima 42
Histriculus histrio 42, 48 Ichrhyophthirius 12- Lacrymaria olor 42, ll3, 215
Histriculus similis 42 igneus, Stentor 48,663 Lac'rymaria pupula 42
Hh h hii i s os s tt t lr or r ioi io o pm, , h uH S rs y t i y as cl t o or 1ni rc 2uyu mc , l hu 1,i s 6a S ,4 t4 e 12 8 r 8, k ,4 i e 38 ll 8a 3 ,4 2 385, 395, 396, i ii i m nmlli cn ph ir so e e ai r s h ,s e i ss Cn u, os mCi ts , h o, D u tT rh i ndi un ii art ni n n iu 3in a 8mo p 3 8s 1r 9s I 648, 65 I L L L La aa ac cc c' ' rr r r yy y y mn nm t t aaa a rtr r ü' i ii a daa a r s v e ao e ps r 2 nrt t 6t' o ia 5 pt c ' a ue l I a2 i c r6 ' a5 i s 4 42 2
402,l0l incisa, Vorticella 5l lac'ustris, C odonella 6ll
Holophrya alveolata 42 inclinans, Rhabdostyla 452, 536 lac'ustris, Coleps hirtus 38
H H o ol lo op phh rr yy aa a bt icra o r4 o2 nata 42 i in nc flu ar tv au ,s C, oC l po ole dp as 33 88, 299 lI aa cc 'u us st tr ri is s , d Eic ,p'h iso tt yo ln ist a 4, 0E , ,p 5i 1s 5tyl is 5 ll
H H o ol lo op phh rr yy aa d gais rc go al mor e l4 la2 e, , 4 B6, u 5 rs3 e,3 lla2 5 383 ii nnf fl r a at vu am c, u C o y l ac tI uo t sr ,i c h Piu sm eu 3 d9 ohaplocaulus 30, l la acc uu ss tt rr ii ss mlae av gi ns a, ,T Ein ,ptin isn tyo lp iss i 5s 1 56 , 1 57 16
Holophrya gargamellre 383, 384, 385 46, 452, 4BJ , 491,, 492, 501 lacustris retic'ulata, Tintinnopsis 617
Holophrya gracilis 42 inJusionum complex, Vorticella 51, 4Bl lacustris, Rimostrombidium 4J, 58, 345,
H olophrya haplo stoma 42 ing e nita, V a ginic ola 50 425, 595, 596, 604, 605,, 606, 61 l, 61 3
H H oo ll oo pph hr ry ya a h keex sa st lr eic ri h 25a 2 42 i in nq qu ui ie linta u, m O ,p Th r iy no ti ng nle idn ia u m44 631 l la ac c'u 'ust st' ti ris s ,t 'u S g teo ns oa s, eE m,p ei s llt ayl i s 4 85 ,2 3 618, 638, 643,
H olophrya lieberkuehnii 42 inte rme dittm, Spiro stomum 4J 649
Holophrya mobilis 383, 387 introversus, Stentor 663 lacustris, Strobilidium 596
H Ho ol lo op ph hr ry ya a n oi vg ur mica 4n 2s , 3 48 63 , 383, 402 i inn vv a ag gi in na at ta a, , E R p hais bt dy oli s s t4 y0 la 536 l la ac cu us st tr ri is s, , T T ii nn tt ii nni n od pi o p si s s i s 6 6 51 07
Holophrya perlucida 42 invallatum, Disematostoma 409, 413, 414 laeyis, Tintinnopsis lacustris 6ll
H olophrya pharyngeata 31 2, 31 4 inversa, Trichospira 50
183

Index
Lage nophrys acuminata 258 lintneticuru , Zoothamnium 52, 508 ludibunda, Oxytric lta 45
La g e nop h ry s v a gi n i c' o I a 42 limnicola, Chaenea 3J Ludio 53
lagenula, Lacrymaria 42 Limnostrombidium 12, 461, 553, 555, 560, Ludio parvulus 43
Iagenula, Sn'ombidiunt 48 56J, 570, 574, 5J5,585, 586, 591, 593, luridus, Loroce phalus 43, 252
Lagynophrya 258 595, 59J , 604, 6ll lutca, Vasicola 5l
Lagynophrya acuminata 42, 58, 258, 265 Limnostrombidium pelagicum 43, 57 4, I uteunt, C ondylostoma 656
La gy nop h ry a Jus i de n s 258, 259 57J,518,519 lynceus, Aspidisca 36
La gynophrya monti I lata 42 Limnostrombidium pela goviride 51 4, 517
Lagynophrya ovalis 42 Limnostrombidiur?? spp. 57 5, 586, 590 M
La gyrutp hrya ros t ru t o 42. 258. 259 Limnostrombidium viride 4, 35 , 43 , 48,, 5 B,
Lagynophrya simplex 42 199, 203, 205, 206, 20J, 310, 432, 5J4, macrostoma, G lauc'onta 4l
Lagynophrya sp.259 57 5, 577 , 661 ntacrostonla, U rotric'ha 50,344,346, 341
Lagynop hrys acuntinata 258 line are, Le pidotrachelophyllum 43, 262 magna, Epistylis lacustt'is 5 15, 5 l6
Lagynurus 363 I i ne ar e, Tra c h e I op hy I I unt 262 ntagna, Nassula 44
Lagynus 53 I i n guif'e t'a, Ac' i neta 36 ma gna, Sphaerolthrya 47
Lagynus elegans 42,58 Linostonta 655 ma gna , Tillina 49
Lagynus.faurei 252 Li nostonta vorticel la 655 nta gnLtnt, C ondyl ostoma 38
lamella, Litonotus 43 Linostomella 221, 553, 655 ma gnunt , Lemhadion 43
laminarius, Metopus 44 Linostomella vorticella 38, 43, 432, 553, ma gnus, Lorodcs 43, 58, 441
la nt' e o I a t unt, S n'o n gy I i d i unt 48 655,683,710 nta.jor, Cyrtolophosis I 18, l 2l
lanu g i n o sa, C a lypt ot r i ( ha 37 Lionotus anas 43 ma.j us, H isti ohaIa ntiunt 424
lata, Caenontorpha 37 Lionotus gandolfii 43 ma ltt'o sty I a, S ty I o nyc hi a 48
late ritia, C yc' lo gramma 39 Litonotus anguilla 43 mali gna, Ophryoglena 44
lateritia, Naxella 39 Litortotus carinatus 43 ntamillata, Acaryophrya 36,3J ,42
I at e ri t i unt, B I ep hari s ma 37 Litonotus cygt'tus 43, 53 mamillata, Bala nophrya 37
l la at ue rs et nri ta i,t a P, roV r o o r dtic o ne l 4la 6 486 L Li i tt o o n n o o t ut u ss . .f fa it ss t i' d i eo nI a s 4 43 1, 43 m ma am rgi all ra itt aa c, 'L ea ug ny t,n o Cp ih nr ey ta o c4 'h2 ilunt 38, 53, 5J ,
lemoni, Uron"icha 359 Litonotus grandis 43 27 5, 601 ,720
Lembadion 12 Litonotus lamella 43 margaritata chlorelli gera, Vorticella 492
Lemhadion bullinum 42 Litonotus nanus 43 ntargaritata, Pseudovot'tic'ella 4l , 5l
Lembadion conc hoidc s 42 Litonotus p le urosi gma 43 mar garitata, V orti c' e I la 5 |
Lenthadion lucens 42, 310 Litonotus vesiculosus 43 ma r garitifer, D i leptus 40
Lembodion ntagnum 43 Litostomatea I 1 I ruarginata, Vorti cella 5l
Lemhus elongatus 43 lohata, Cothurnia 38 marina, Dysreria 40
Lembus pusillus 43 lohianc'oi .f'usiformis minima, Tintinnopsis marina, Frontonia 41
marina, Vorticclla 5l
Lentbus saprophilus 43 49
lentnarunt, Tokophrya 7 ll loc'kw,oodi, P seudovortic'eIla monilata 4l ntarinunt, H istioholantium 424
Lepidotrac he lophy llum I I l, 262 Lohmanni e I la oviformi s 43 marinunt, (Jronema 50
Marituja 43I
Lepidot rac he lop hy I lum fornici s 262 I o n gic' ol i s, V a gi nicola 50
Lepidotrachelophyllum lineare 43, 262 I on gic'ollis, P latyc:ola 46 Marituja c'audata 43, 431 , 432
Leproti ntinnus pe I Iut idus 43 I o n gifi I um, V orti c'e lla 5 | Marituja pelagica 43, 56,58, 414, 431, 440
Leptopharynx 12,50 LongiJi'agma 392,395 ma r sup ial i s, As p i d i sc'a 36
Maryna rotunda 43
leucas, Bursaria 416 Longift'agma obliqua 43, 50, 302, 303, 309,
matthesi matthesi, Urotricha 50, 301, 302,
leuc'as, Bursaria Frontonia 416 313 , 314
leacas, Frontonia 4l ,30, 57 ,272, 416, 441 Longitricha 368, 392, 395 303, 313 , 340, 342, 343
matthesi tristicha, Urotricha 50, 59, 301,
Le ucophry s fl uv iati I is 43 Lon gitric ha .flava 43, 368, 369
LL ee u ucc o op p h hr ry y s s oo vv uu nm t, 4 C0 l9 a, t h4 r1 o0 s, to4 n1 r3 u 409 Lon 3g 1it 3r ,ic 3h 6a 8 puytoraci 43 , 302, 303, 309 , mat3 th0 e2 , s i3 , 0 ()3 r, o 3 t rI i c3 h, a34 30 3, 53 ,4 32 4, 03 ,4 38 52
Leucophrys patula 43 I oric'atus, S te ntor 662 matthesi, Urotricha matthesi 50, 301, 302,
Leucophrys ten'aedrica 414 Loxoc'ephalus 12 303, 3 13, 340,,342,343
Leucophrys tetraedri(a, Disematostoma 414 Loro c' e yt ha I us luc: idus 43 ntaupasi, Colpoda 38
levande ri, C ae nomorp ha 37 Loxoc'ephalus luridus 43, 252 mayeri, Pelagovorticella 45, 51, 453, 456,
libera, Podophrya 46 Loxodes 12, 20, 53, 419,132 480, 482,509,528
liehe rkue hni, Spathidi um 47 Lorodes nrugnus 43, 58, 441 mayeri, Vorticella 51, 480
I ie ber kue ltni i, D i n op h rya 40 Loxodes rostrunt 43 medusula, Caenomorpha 37
lieberkue hnii, Hoktphryo 42 Lo-rodes striatus 43, 53, 5B ntegamicronuclaota, Trichodina dontergnei
I iehe rkü hni, D i noph rya 213, 21 4 Lo.r'oplty|Iunt 12.43 49, 58, 472, 413, 479
Lilämorpha 134,164 Lo xo p hy I I u nr .fa s c' i o I a 43 Mcgatric'ha partita 139, 140
Lilämorpha viridis 30, 43, 56,164 Loxophyllum helus 43 nte I e a gri s, Am p hile ptus 36
Liliimorphidae 164 Lorophyl lum melea gt'i s 43 nrcl ea gris, Loxophyl lum 43
L l li imi nli to n nn e et to i tc ir p u m nh ,a ,C v air r yi cd 'hi oes ts I i iu6 t'm4 u3 mJ, 5 30 98 L I t umo cr 'n eo np e sh ti ,cy Ll u enI mu t,n bt C s y de c it ' i I o ng t e ri 4r u c m h i 3u4 m l3 205 n mte eI l Jo o 2p s 4l it r ,o a r 7en 2,t e 5G, lS a 2jp e la wth si kd aiu jm op h4 rJ ya 30, 41, J23,
c u t C t l r hi , 205, 206, I a o 2 , 0 ,
20'7 ,213 luciae, Placus 58 me I osirae, Sphaerophrya 7 25
I imnetic unt, P hascolodon 693 luc'idus, Loxocephal us 43 Membranicola 626
184

Index
Membranicola tamari 43, 626, 636, 638, mi nima, T i nt i nni dium fl uv i at i I e 49 Monodinium perrieri 44, l6J , lJ8, 183,
643, 649 minima, Tintinnopsis davidffii cylindrica l9l, 196, 198, 202
Meseres 555, 561 , 569 49 Monodinium rostratum 196
Meseres cordiformis 43 minima, T intinnops is karaj ac e nsis 49 Monodinium sp. 199
Mesodiniidae 134, 16l, 164 minima, Tintinnopsis lobiancoi fusformis M onodinium spp. 39 , lJ B , l9B, 202, 214
Mesodinium 30, 111, L34, 136, 140, l4l, 49 Monodinium vorax 183
147 , 164 minima, Tintinnopsis meunieri 49 morula, P rorodon 46, 383
Mesodinium acarus 43, 58, 134, 135, 140, minima, Tintinnopsis tubulosa 49 moserae, Pelagolacrymaria 45, 58, 258, 265
t4l minimum, Didinium 39 mucicola, Cyrtolophosis 39, 60J , 692,718
Mesodinium cinctum 139, 140 minimum, Strobilidium 48 mucic ola, Tintinnidium 637
Mesodinium.fimbriatum 135, 136, l3J, 138, minimum, Zo othamnium 52 Mucophrya 723
t40 minimus, Metopus 44 Mucophrya pelagica 30, 44,723, J25,, J26,
Mesodinium Halteria pulex 139 minkewickzi, U rotricha 35 I 727
Mesodinium phialinum 135, 136, 138 minor, Coleps hirtus 38,280 muelleri, Stentor 48, 656,, 662
Mesodinium pulex 4, 43,, 134,, 135, 136, minor, Disematostoma 409, 413, 414 multiformis, Stentor 48,, 663,, 6l I
l3l,138, 139 minor, H istiohalantium 424 multimicronucleatum, P aramecium 45, ll3
Mesodinium pulex striata l4l minor, Oxytricha 45 multimicronuc le atus, Ste ntor 662
M e sodinium recurvum 155 minor, Plagiocampa 46 multisetosa, Urotricha 301, 3l 6, 335, 336,
Mesodinium rubrum 43, 136 minus, Spirostomum 47 340,342
Mesodinium sp. 137 ,, l4l minuta, Cristigera 39 muscicola, Cyclidium 39
Mesodinium spp. 29,, 148, 151, 155, 161, minuta, Trochilia 50 muscicola, Euplotes 4l
162, 163,555, 560, 561,570 minutus, Balantiophorus J 18 muscorum, Keronopsis 42
Mesodinium velox 136,, 138, 140 minutus, Paradileptus 221,, 226 muscorum, S aprophilus 4l
metaholica, Plagiocampa 46 minutus, Prorodon 402, 404 musc orum, S athrophilus 47
Metacineta 36 mirabile, Pelagostrombidium 4, 45, 48, 58, mus culus, B lepharisma 3J
M etacineta my stacina 43 345,,585, 586, 589, 590 musculus, Paruroleptus 45
Metacystis crassa 43 mirabile, Strombidium 48, 585, 590 musculus, IJ roleptus 45
M etacystis daphnicola 43 mirabilis, Epalxella 40 mutabile, Acropisthium 36, 40,213
Metacystis exigua 43 mobilis, Bursellopsis nigricans 3J , 5J , 3J l, mutabilis, Plagiocampa 46 |
Metacystis truncata 43 372,375,383,384,387 mutabili s, Tric hodina 47 3
Metanophrys l4l mobilis , Holophrya 383, 3BJ mutans, Enchelys 252
M etastrombidium ni grum 43 mobilis, Jankowskia 42 mutans, Vorticella 5l
Metopus 16,, 53, 553 mobili s, T etrahyme na 240 My cterothrix tuamotue nsis 44
Metopus acidiferus 43 moebiusi, Euplotes 4l Myrionecta 134, 140, 164
Metopus curvatus 44 moebiusi, Paracineta 45 Myrionecta rubra 4, 43, 44, 134, 136, 143
Metopus daphnides 44 monilata lockwoodi, P seudovorticella 4l myriophylli, Epenardia 4l
Metopus es 44, 441 monilata, H olosticha 42 myriophylli, Glaucoma 4l
Metopus.fuscus 44 monilata, Keronopsis 42 mystacea, Gastrostyla 41, 42
Metopus hyalinus 44 monilata, Pseudovorticella 4J , 51, 450, 502 mystacea, H olosticha 42
Metopus laminarius 44 monilata, Vorticella 51, 503 mystacina, M etacineta 43
Metopus minimus 44 monilatus, Dileptus 40 mytilus complex , Stylonychia 49, 53, 685
Metopus pulcher tortus 44 monilatus, Enchely odon 40
Metopus rostratus 44 monilatus, M onilicaryon 40, 44, 234
N
Metopus setifer 44 Monilicaryon 233
Metopus spinosus 44 Monilicaryon monilatus 40, 44,234 nais , U rotricha 50, 348, 351
Metopus spiralis 44 moniliforme, Spathidi um 4J nana, Platyophrya 46
Metopus striatus 44 moniliger, Dileptus 40 nana, P seudoplatyophrya 46
meunieri minima, Tintinnopsis 49 Monodinium 30, 39, 111, 148, 151, 155, Nannophrya 363
mexicana, Tentaculifera 221 , 222, 225 ll l, lJZ, 178, 183, 206, 252 nanum, Monodinium halbianii 185
mi c r o dis c Ltm, O p e rc ular ia 44 Monodinium alveolatum 44, 178, 183, 19l, nanus, Litonotus 43
microradians, Hastatella 460, 461, 462 t96 N assula 12, 692, 1 00,, 1 04
microscopica, V orticella 5 | Monodinium armatum 59,lJB, lB3, 191 Nassula ambigua 44
Microspiretta 688 Monodinium balbiani 182 Nassula aurea 44,100
microstoma complex, Vorticella 5l , 53, 48J Monodinium balbianii 44, lJz, lJ9, L82, Nassula carpathica 44
microstoma, Enchelys 40 190, 191, 198, 1 99, 202, 203 Nassula citrea 44
Microthoracina 12, 692 Monodinium balbianü balbianü 44, 58, Nassula elegans 44
Microthorax 12 118, L82, 190, r9l, 196, 202 Nassula exigua 44
Microthorax pusillus 44 Monodinium balbianü breviproboscis 44, Nassula mag,na 44
Microthorax sp. 59 ll8, 182, 183, 190, 196, 198, 199 N assula ornata 44, 1 00, l 0l
mime ticum, S aprodinium 4l Monodinium balbianii nanum lB5 Nassula picta 44,l0l
mimeticus, Prorodon 46 Monodinium balbianii rostratum 44, 58, Nassula tumida 44
minima, Coxliella helix 39 182, 183, 196 Nassulid a 54, 6921 700
minima, Lacrymaria 42 M onodinium halbianii, Didinium 182 nassulids 651
minima, Rhabdoaskenasia 4J, 58, 134, Monodinium chlorelligerum 44, 58, 167,, Nassulina 12
148, 15 1, I 54, I6L 182, r83, 1 8J , l9l, 196, 198, 202 Nassulopsis 12
185

Irtdex
Nassulopsis ele gans 44, 7 0l octospinus, Coleps 3B ovum, Prorodon 46
Nassulopsis vorax 44 oc ulatum, Strobilidium 48 ovLtm, C lathrato stoma 38
nasuta, Plagiopyla 46,53, 58 Odontostomatida 12 ovum, Clathrostoma Leucophrys 409
nasuta,Vorticella l7l oligotricha, Epalxella 40 oyltm, Enchelyodon 252, 253, 254
nasutum rostratum, Didinium 196 Oligotrichetea 54 ovLtm, Epistylis 535
nasuturn, Didinium 27, 39, 57, 167, 168, Oligotrichida 12, 54,, 553, 554 ovum, Holophrya 42,, 46,383, 402
t7t, t82, 183, 184, t89, 275 oligotrichs 16, 30, 54, 126, 148, 151, 155, ovLtm, Leucophrys 409, 410, 413
natans, Histiobalantium 42, 424 164, lJ2, |J4,, 183, r9l, 202, 206, 266, ovltm, Placus 46
natans, Pelagovorticelln 45, 51, 57, 58, 301, 461, 553, 595, 685, 720, 733 ovltm, Rhabdostyla 47 , 535, 531
453, 456,480, 48 1, 482, 509, 528 oli g otr ic hum, C y c lidium 39 ovum, Trachelius 49, 53, 234, 236
natans, Vortic e I la 5 l, 48O, 482 olor, Lacrymaria 42, 113,, 215 oxypus, Astylozoon 453
natans, Vortic e lla c onvallar ia 482 ondina, Urotricha 351 Oxytricha 16, 553
naumanni, Ophrydium 44, 540, 544, 551, O ny chodromop sis flexilis 44 Oxytricha chlorelligera 45
672,673 Onychodromus grandis 44 O xytricha cras sistilata 45
navicula, Dysteria 4O opaca, Trichopelma 50 O xy tr ic ha e u g le niv ora 45
Naxella 206,7OO Opercularia 12 Oxytricha fallax 45
Naxella lateritia 39 Opercularia allensi 44 O xytricha ferruginea 45
nebulife ra, Rhabdo sty la 47 O p ercularia articulata 450 Oxytricha ludibunda 45
nebulifera, Vorticella 5l Opercularia coarctata 44 Oxytricha minor 45
nic o leae, P s eudo hap loc aulus 502 O p erc ularia microdis cum 44 Oxytricha ovalis 45
niger, Stentor 48, 663,664, 665, 667 Opercularia nutans 40,, 44,, 523, 524 O xytricha p e llionella 45
nigra, C ondylostoma 656 O p e r c ular ia p ar asitic a 450 O xy tr ic ha planc to nic a 685
nigra, Trichodina 473 O p ercularia phry ganea 44 O xytricha planctontica 685
nigricans mobilis, Bursellopsis 37 , 57 , 37 l, Ophrydia 543 Oxytricha saprobia 45
372,375,383,384,387 Ophrydium 451, 452, 540, 543 Oxytricha setigera 45
nigricans nigricans, Bursellopsis 31, 37 l, Ophrydium adae 540, 544 Oxytricha sp. 59
372,375,376,383,387 O phrydium cras sicaule 44 Oxytrichidae 686
nigricans, Burse llopsis 37 2, 383 Ophrydium eichhorni 44
nigricans, Bursellopsis nigricans 37, 37 l, Ophrydium eutrophicum 44, 56,540, 543, P
372,3'75,376,383,387 544, 551
nigricans, C ryptochilum 39 Ophrydium hyalinum 543, 544, 545 Paracineta moebiusi 45
nigricans, Frontonia 4l Ophrydium naumanni 44,, 540,, 544, 551, Paracolpoda I 14
Paracolpoda steinii I l4
nigricans, H olophrya 383 672, 613
nigricans, Uronema 39, 50, 58 Ophrydium spp. 30, 452 Paradileptus 12, l1l, 221, 232, 233
nigrum, M etastrombidium 43 Ophrydium versatile 44, 223, 450, 540, F aradileptus caducus 232,, 234, 231
niveus, Prorodon 46 543,551 P aradileptus canellai 232, 234, 235
niveus, Pseudoprorodon 46 Ophryoglena 12 Paradileptus conicus 221, 222, 223, 225
nodosa, Cothurnia 38 Ophryoglena atra 44 P aradileptus D ileptus elephantinus 221
nolandi, Coleps 38, 273, 274, 279, 281, Ophryoglena.flava 44 P ar adile ptus e I efantinus 223
284,292,293,297 O p hry o gl e na flav i c ans 44 Paradileptus elephantinus 30, 45, 53, 58,
Nolandia 292,297 Ophryo glena inquieta 44 22L,234, 546
notophora, Stylonychia 49 Ophryoglena maligna 44 P aradileptus e stensis 221, 222, 226
novemc drinatus, E up lote s 47 Ophryo glena pelagica 45. P aradileptus flagellatus 221, 222, 224, 234
nutans, Epistylis 40 Ophryoglena tigrina 45 Paradileptus minutus 221, 226
nutans, Opercularia 40, 44, 523, 524 Ophryo gl ena utri cularia e 45 P aradileptus ovalis 221, 225
nympharum, Epistylis 40, 515, 516, 519, Ophryoglena vorax 45 P aradileptus robustus 22I, 222, 226
521,522 ophry o glena, P enardiella 45 Paradileptus sp.223
Ophryoglenina 12 paradoxa, Triloba 238, 239 , 242
o Ophryoscolex 12 Paraisotricha 12
Opisthonecta 450, 451, 453, 456, 467 Paramecium 12, 16,20, 111, 114,, lJ3, 174,
Obertrumia 12, 692,700 Opisthonecta bivacuolata 45, 461 , 468 17 5, 184,, 272
Obertrumia aurea 44, 30, 692, 7 00 O pisthone cta he nne guy 467 Paramecium aurelia 45,, 53, 58, 116, 1J3,,
O b ertrumia geor giana 7 00, 7 0I Opisthonecta henneguyi 45, 453, 456, 467 275
Obertrumia gracilis "1 0l O pisthonecta patula 467 Paramecium bursaria 2J, 45,53, 1 16, 171,
Obertrumia kahli 707 O pisthotric ha cras sistilata 45 548
Obertrumia regina70l Orbopercularia 452 Paramecium calkinsi 45
Obertrumia xanthaTOl ornata, N assula 44, 7 00, l 0l P aramecium caudatum 45,, 53, lJ 3, 17 4, 27 5
obliqua, Longifragma 43, 50,302,303, 309, ornata, Tokophrya 49 P aramec ium multimicronucleatum 45, lJ 3
313,314 ovalis, Lagynophrya 42 Paramecium putrinum 45, 53,, 58, ll3
obliqua, Urotricha 50 ovalis, Oxytricha 45 Paramecium spp.272,, 4lJ , 421
oblonga, Halteria 4l ovalis, P aradileptus 221, 225 P aramec ium tetraur elia ll 3
octava corlnplex, Vorticella 51, 487 ovata', Plagiopyla 46 Paramecium trichium 45
octava costata, Vorticella 486 ovata, Urotricha 50, 349, 352,360,, 361 P arap odophry a soliformis 45
octava,Vorticella 486 ov iformis, Lohmannie lla 43 p aras itic a, O p e r c ularia 450
oc taya, Vortic e I la striata 51, 486 ovoides, Rhabdostyla 535, 536, 538 Parastokesia 414
786

Index
Parastrombidium 685 P e lagostrombidium spp. 57 4, 578, 586 Plac'us striatus 46
P arastrombidium planctonicum 685 Pelagothrix 368, 384, 392, 395 p lagia, D eriotric'hia 39
Parastromhidiunt planctonicum, (Jrosoma Pelagothrix alt,eolata 42, 45, 341, 342, 395, P lagioc:ampa merabol i ca 46
685 396,391 , 402 Plagiocampa minor' 46
P araurostyla weissei 45, 50 Pelagothrix chlorelligera 45, 58, 302, 325, P la gi oc:ampa mutahil i s 46
pat'tita, Megatric'ha 139, 140 341 , 342, 395, 402 Plagioc'ampa rouri 46
P at'ut'oleptus caudatus 45 Pelagothrix plancticola 45,, 395, 396, 401 P la gioc'ampa sassyke nsis 46
P aruroleptus ntusculus 45 P elagotrichidium 683, 685 Plagiopyla 12, 53, 54,
parva, Bizonula 3J Pelagotrichidium faurei 45, 553, 656, 6J7 Plagiopyla nasuta 46, 53, 58
,
parvula, Balladina 3l 683 Plagiopyla ovata 46
parvula, U rotricha 35 l, 352, 354 P elagovasicola | 54, 206, 2L3 p lanc:tic: ola, Ap ir e tta 688
parvulus, Ludio 43 Pelagovasicola cinctum 45, 39, 205, 206, plancticola, Pelagothrix 45,395, 396, 401
patella planktonicus, Euplotes 4l 213 plancticola, Spiretella 4J, 553, 6JJ, 683,
patella, Euplotes 41, 53, 5J pelagoviride, Limnostrombidiuru 5J 4, 5JJ 688
patula, O pi sthone cta 467 pe la goviride, Strombidiunt 51 4 planctic'ola, Spiretta 688
patula, Tetrahymena 43 Pelagovorticella 480 planc:tonica, O xytricha 685
pe c'tinata, Di sc' omorpha 40 Pelagovorticella mayeri 45, 51, 453, 456, p lan c: t o ni c a, T e tr e adr op hry a 49
pec'tinata, D iscontorphe I la 40 480,, 482,509,528 pl anc:toni ca, (J rosonta 685
pec'tinatum, Carchesiunt 37, 508 Pelagovorticella natans 45,, 51, 5J, 58, 453, planctonicum, Balanion 29, 32, 37 , 57 ,
pectinatum, C archesiunt Zoothamnium 508 456, 480, 481, 482, 509, 528 345 , 348, 352, 363, 425
p e c t i natum, C y c' I otr i c' h i um 39 pellionella, Oxytricha 45 p I a n c' t o ni c: unt, P a r a s I r' onth id i um 685
pectinatum, Epicarchesium 3J, 40, 52, 508, pellionellum, Tachysoma 45 , 49 planctonic'unt, P seudobalanion 345 , 363
521 , 528 pellucida, E nc:helys 252, 253 p I an c' t o n ic: um, (J r o s o nt a 685
pec'tinatunt, Zoothamniuru 52, 508 pe lluc'ida, Enc' he lys B alantidion 252 planc'tonic'unt, (Jrosonta Parastrontbidiunt
pec:tinis, Eutintinnus 35, 36 pellucidum, Balantidion 3l ,252 6Bs
pedic'ulus, Kerona 42, 473 p e I I u c' idus, Lepr oti nti nnus 43 p la n c: t o n i c' um, V i o s ont a 685
pediculus, Trichodina 50, 450, 472 P elodiniunt 53 p I an c' ton i sunt, U r o s onta 685
pelagica, Belonophrya 30,3J , 5J, ll2, l13, P elodinium renif'orme 45 pl anctontic'a, O xytri c lta 685
I 15, 1 lB, l2l,123,124 P enardiella ophryoglena 45 planctonticum, Pseudostrombidium 35, 47 ,
pelagica, Bursellopsis 3J , 57 , 371, 372, Peniculina 12 50, 432, 553, 6JJ, 693, 685
375,383, 3B4,3BJ ,388, 390 peniculines I I p la n c' t onti c um, (J r o s oma 50
pelagica, Crohylura 39 P eridion 364 plankticola, Spiratella 688
pelagica, M arituja 43 , 56, 58 , 414, 431, 440 Peridionella 364 planlcticola, SpireteIIa 688
pelagica, Mucophrya 30, 44,723, J25, J26, Peritrichia 12, 54, 450 p la n kti c: o la, S p i t'e tta 688
121 Peritrichida 433 planlcticolus, Spiretta 688
pe lagica, Ophryoglena 45 peritrichs 16, 30, 53, 54, 148, 151, 155, 183, pl anktonicunt, B alani on 365
pelagica, Strontbidium viride 51 4, 5ll 191,206, J32, J33 pl anktonic'tts, E,uplote s patella 4l
pelagica, Urotricha 50, 59, 301, 302, 303, perlucida, H olophrya 42 planti c' ola, Spiretta 688
30J, 309, 313, 316, 335, 340, 342, 432 pernix, Balanophrya 37 plate ssoide s, D ic' hi I um 39
pelagica, Vorticella 5 I perrieri, Didinium balhianii 202 P latycola lon gic'ollis 46
pelagicum, Limnostrombidium 43, 57 4, perrieri, Monodinium 44, 16J, lJB, 183, Platynenta sociale 46
57J , 518, 519 l9l, 196, lgg,202 P latynentatum soc'ial e 46
p e la g ic' um, S tr ontbidiunt 51 4 pharyngeata, H olophrya 37 2, 37 4 Plarynematum solivagum 46
p e la g i c' us, B ai kal aste r 37 Phascolodon 12, 692, 693,132 plaryodon, Prorodon 46
pelagicus, Haplocaulus 41, 5l P hasc'olodon c'ontrac:tilis 45, 693 Platyophrya nana 46
Pelagodileptus I I l, 232 P hasc olodon limneticunt 693 P latyophry)a spumac'ola 46
Pelagodileptus trachelioides 40, 45, 58, Phascolodon vorticella 45, 432, 693 platy s oma, V ortic ella 486
222, 223,229,231 , 232 P hialina 258, 265 platystoma, Steinia 48
Pelagohalteria 30, 136, 140, 461, 555, 560, P hi al ina v e rruic ul ar i s 42 platy stoma, U rotricha 3 52,, 359
566,595, 591 , 604 P hialinides 265 , 268 Pleurofragma 46
Pelagohalteria cirriftra 45,56,58, 559, 566 P hialinide s australis 268 Pleuronema chrysalis 46
P elagohalteria spp. 556 phialinum, Mesodiniunt 135, 136, 138 Pleuronenla coronatum 46, 58, 424
Pelagohalteria viridis 4, 2J, 45, 56, 58, 555, P hilasteride s arntatus 46 P I e uronema c'ras sunt 46
559, 550, 566,561,569 phoenix, C risti gera 39, 5J P I e uronema c'yc:lidium 46
P elagolacrymaria I I 1, 265 phry ganea, O p er"cularia 44 P I e uronema puytorac'i 46
Pelagolacrymaria moserae 45 , 58, 258, 265 P hysalophrya spuntosa 46 Pleuronemc spp. 421
Pelagolacrymaria rostrata 45, 258, 265, physarum, Scyphidia 47 pleurosigma, Amphileptus 36, 43
266,261 pic'ta, Nassula 44,701 ple ut'osi gma, Litonotus 43
Pelagostrombidium 200, 461, 555, 560, pic'ta, Vorticella 51, 495, 496, 498 Pleurostomatida 12, I | |
567, 5J0, 575, 516,583, 584,585, 595, piekarskii, Colpoda steinii I 11 P I e ut'otric' ha grandi s 46
59J , 604, 6ll piriforntis, Actinöbolus l12 plicatilis, E,pistylis 40, 53, 452
Pelagostrombidium fallax 4, 35, 45, 58, piriforntis, Vortic:ella 535, 531 P odopht'ya ben galensi s 46
5J 4, 5JJ ,58 I , 585, 590, 5gl, 592 piscis, Uroleptus 50 P odopht'ya brevipoda 46
Pelagostrombidium mirabile 4, 45, 48, 58, Plac:us luciae 58 Podophrya c'yclopum 46
345,585, 586, 589, 590 Plac'us ovunt 46 Podopht'ya J'ixa 46
787

Iridex
Podophrya flexilis 526 Pseudoprorodon sulcatus 46 a
Podophrya libera 46 P s e udopr or odo n v e s ic ulatus 47 quadripartita, Tokophrya 49
Podophrya sp.687,702 Pseudostrombidium 12, 553, 685
quadri spi nus, C ol eps 299
Polyhymenophora 553 Pseudostrombidium planctonticum 35, 4J,
polymorphus, Stentor 48,53, 662 50, 432, 553, 6JJ, 683, 685
polypinum, Carchesium 37 , 53, 450, 468 P seudovorticella 51 , 452, 495,501 , 507 R
porcatum, Cyclidium 39 P seudov orticella chlamydophora 452 radians, Actinobolina 36, ll2, 115, 118,
porculus, Spathidium 47 P s eudovortic ella fasciculata 5 l, 492 l2l, 124, 126, 415, 694
potamophilus, T hi gmo gaster 49 P seudovorticella margaritata 4J, 5l radians, Actinobolus l12, l18, 123
p o tifo rmi s, T i nt i nno p s i s 49 P seudovorticella monilata 4J,, 51, 450,, 502 radians, Hastatella 30, 41, 450, 453, 456,
procera, Hemiophrys 4l P s eudov ortic ella monilata lockwoodi 47 459, 460
ppr ro oc ue mrus b, A nm s,p Eh pile p tt yu lis 3 46 ,, 4 40l PP ss ie lou td rio cv ho ar ti fc ae ll ll aa v 5e 8s 5tita 47, 5l r rea m cuo vs ui s s i ,m Mu m s, oZ do io nt ih ua mm 1n 5iu 5m 52
c e is s , 57,450, 509, x r m e
527 P silotricha fallax, S trombidium 585 regina, Obertrumia 70I
proraefrons, Dysteria 4O Psilotricha succisa 47, 50 rehwaldi, Strombidium 578, 586
Prorodon armatides 46 puerneri, Epistylis 516 r e niforme, C hasmato stoma 37
Prorodon armatus 46 pulc he llum, P s e udo c ine toc hilum 46 reniforme, Pelodinium 45
Prorodon brachyodon 46 pulcher tortus, Metopus 44 reniformis, Colpoda 3B
Prorodon cinereus 46 pulex striata, Mesodinium l4l reticulata, Codonella cratera 38
P rorodon c orpule ntis s imum 46 pulex, Halteria 139 reticulata, Tintinnop sis lacustris 617
Prorodon discolor 46 pulex, Mesodinium 4, 43, 134, 135, 136, Rhabdoaskenasia 134, 136, 140, I4l , L6l,
P rorodon garganellae 46 137,, 138, 139 164
Prorodon laurenti 46 pulex, Mesodinium Halteria 139 Rhabdoaskenasia minima 4J,,58, 134, 148,
Prorodon mimeticus 46 pullaster, H olosticha 42 l5 1, 154, 16l
P rorodon minutus 4O2, 404 punctata, H emiophry s 42 Rhabdophorina 1 I 1
Prorodon morula 46,383 punctatus, Amphileptus 42 Rhabdostyla 535, 536
Prorodon niveus 46 pupa, Enchelys 40,254 Rhabdostyla brevipe s 47
Prorodon ovum 46 pupula, Lacrymaria 42 Rhabdo sty la c ongre gata 47
Prorodon platyodon 46 purpureum, Strombidium 4 Rhabdostyla conipes 4J
Prorodon teres 46 pusilla, Urotricha 301, 335 Rhabdostyla cyclopic ola 535
Prorodon viridis 46, 402 pusillum, Tintinnidium 49,, 57 , 58, 206, Rhabdostyla cyclopis 535
prorodontids 16 627, 638, 642, 648, 649, 652 Rhabdostyla cylindrica 535, 538
Prostomatida 54,272 pusillum, Trachelophyllum 49 Rhabdostyla dubia 535, 536
prostomatids 54, 16l, 172, 174,272,720, pusillus, C ohnilembus 38 Rhabdostyla inclinans 452, 536
731 pusillus, Lembus 43 Rhabdostyla invaginata 536
Prostomatina 12 pusillus, Microthorax 44 Rhabdo sty la ne bulift ra 47
Pseudobalanion 363 pusillus, P seudocohnilembus 38, 43, 46 Rhabdostyla ovoides 535, 536, 538
P s eudobalanion planctonicum 345, 363 pustulata, Stylonychia 49. Rhabdostyla ovum 47 , 535,, 537
pseudobursaria, Bursartdium 30, 37, 57, putrina, Stylonyc hia 49 Rhabdostyla pyrifurmis 4l , 535
373, 656, 683,692,709 putrina, Vorticella 5l Rhabdostyla S cyphidia pyrifurmis 535
pseudobursaria, Bursaridium Thylacidium putrinum, P aramecium 45, 53, 58, 173 Rhabdo styla sphaeroide s 4J
709 putrinus, Sathrophilus 4l rhabdostyloide s, V ortic ella 5 I
pseudobursaria, Bursaridium Thylakidium puytoraci, Longitricha 43, 302, 303, 309, Rhagado stoma completum 4J
709 313,368 Rhinakis 700
p s e udo b ur s ar ia, T hy I akid i um 7 09 puytoraci, Pleuronema 46 Rhopalophrya acuta 47
P se udoc hilodonopsi s al givora 46 puytorat'i, (J rotric ha 368 Rhyncho dida 12
P seudocinetoc hilum pulc he llum 46 py gmaeum, C arche sium 535 Rimaleptus 233
P seudocohnilembus pusillus 38, 43, 46 pygmaeum, Epistylis 30, 40, 4J, 5J, 450,, Rimostrombidium 553,555, 560, 56J, 570,
p s e udofurc dta, U rotric ha 3 44, 347 535 5J8,586,595
P se udohaplocaulus 452, 487, 501 pyriforme , Astylozoon 37 , 453, 454, 455, 456 Rimostrombidium armeniensis 47 , 595
P se udohaplocaulus 452, 487, 501 pyrformis complex , Tetrahymena 41, 49, Rimostrombidium brachykinetum 47 , 58,
Pseudohaplocaulus anabaenae 46, 51, 30, 1t9 596, 604, 606, 609, 6 10, 6ll, 615, 720
31,501, 502,503 pyrifurmis, Epistylis 40, 535 Rimostrombidium conicum 609, 6lI, 613
Pseudohaplocaulus infravacuolatus 30, 46, pyriformis, Glaucoma 4l Rimostrombidium humile 47, 48, 58, 596,
452,487 ,491 , 492. 501 pyrformis, Rhabdostyla 47 , 535 604, 606, 607 , 609, 6Ll
P seudo haploc aulus nic ole ae 5O2 pyriformis, Rhabdostyla S cyphidia 535 Rimostrombidium hyalinum 47, 604, 606,
P se udo haploc aulus spp. 491 pyriformis, S cyphidia 535 609,61 1, 615
P s eudoker o nopsis rubra 42, 46 pyriformis, Stentor 662 Rimostrombidium lacustris 47 , 58, 345,
Pseudomicrothorax 692 pyrifurmis, Tetrahymena 4J , lJ3, 184, 275, 425, 595, 596, 604,605, 606,, 6ll, 613
P se ud omi crothorax dubiu s 46 651 Rimostrombidium saltans 596, 611, 613
P seudoplatyophrya nana 46 pyriformis, T intinnop s is 49 Rimostrombidium spp. 578, 5 86
Pseudoprorodon 1l Pyxidium cothurnioides 47 Rimostrombidium velox 4J, 48, 310, 595,
Pseudoprorodon armatus 46 596,604,606, 61 1
P seudoprorodon farctus 46 ringueleti, Botticula 37 , 612
P seudoprorodon niveus 46 ristoi, Urotricha 357, 607
788

Index
robusta, Acineta 36 63J,638, 643,649 S pathidium v ermiculus 4J
robustus, Paradileptus 221, 222, 226 setifer, Metopus 44 Spathidium viride 4l
roeselii, Stentor 48, 53, 58, 662 setiger, Cyclidium 39 spathula, S pathidium 4l
roquei, Frontonia 4l setigera, Oxytricha 45 spectabile, C arche sium 3J
rostrata, Lacrymaria 265 s e ti g e ra, S tr ombidinop s is 48 spetai, Coleps 2J, 29,, 38, 2J2, 2J3, 2J9,
ro strata, Lagynophrya 42, 258, 259 s eti gerum, Loxophyllum 43 281, 284, 285, 28J, 288, 292, 293
rostrata, P elagolacrymaria 45 , 258, 265, setosa, Cristigera 39 S p e taz o on aus trali e ns e 262
266,267 setosa, Glaucoma 4l sphaerica, Urotricha 357,358, 368
rostrata, T etrahyme na 58 setosa, Tetrahymena 41,, 49 sphaerica, Vorticella 31, 51
rostrata, Woodrffia 5l si gmoide s, Trac helophyllum 49, 262 s p hae ric um, Cy c lotric hium 39
rostratum, Didinium balbianii 196 Sikorops 252 sp haeroide s, Rhabdo styla 47
rostratum, Didinium nasutum 196 similis, Balladina 3l Sphaerophrya magna 47
rostratum, M onodinium 196 similis, H istriculus 42 S p haerop hry a me lo s ir ae I 25
rostratum, Monodinium bqlbianü 44, 58, similis, Vorticella 5l Sphaerophrya stokesii 35,41 ,443
182, 183, 196 simonsbergeri, Urotricha 50,, 30 1, 302, 308, Sphenophrya 12
rostratus, Metopus 44 316,324 spinosa, Epalxella 40
rostrum, Loxodes 43 simplex, Acineta 36 spinosus, Metopus 44
rotans, Epistylis 40, 527 simplex, Enchelys 40, 254 spiralis, Brachonella 3J , 44, 5l
rotatorium, Epistylis 535 simplex, Holophrya 42,53, 310 spiralis, Dileptus 40
rotunda, Maryna 43 simplex, Lagynophrya 42 spiralis, Metopus 44
rotunda, Urotricha 335, 336, 331 simplex, Zoothamnium 52 Spiratella 688
rotundus, Actinöbolus 1 12 sinensis, Tintinnop sis 49 S piratella planktic ola 688
rouxi, Plagiocampa 46 siro, Acarella 139, I40 Spiretella 30, 553, 685, 688
ruhens, Furgasonia 4l smalli, Actinobolina 36, ll2, 113, 115, 118, Spiretella plancticola 4J, 553, 6J7, 683,
rubra, Keronopsis 42 123, L24, 725, 126, l2l 688
rubra, Myrionecta 4, 43, 44, 134, 136,, 143 sociale, Platynema 46 Spiretella planktic ola 688
rubra, P seudokeronopsis 42, 46 sociale, P latynematum 46 Spiretta 688
rubrum, Mesodinium 43, 136 Solenophrya crassa 4J Spiretta planctic ola 688
rugosa, Epistylis lacustris 523 s oliformis, P arapodophrya 45 Spiretta plankticola 688 I
rugosa, Scyphidia 452 s olivagum, P latynematum 46 Spiretta planktic olus 688
sp., Acaryophrya 4ll Spiretta plantic ola 688
sp., Askenasia 42,, 156,, 433 Spirochona 12
S sp., Balanion 365, 361 Spirofilum 671
saaleri, D ileptus 232, 234, 235 sp., Coleps 284, 601 ,120 S p i r ofil um t ub i c o I anat ans 4J
saginata, Holophrya 42 sp., Colpoda ll3 Spirostomum 16, 419, 553
salina, Fabrea 4l sp., Cyclidium 59,120 Spirostomum ambiguum 4J, 53,, lJ3, 2J4,
saltans, Rimostrombidium 596, 6ll, 613 sp., Cyclotrichium 59 215
saprobia, Oxytricha 45 sp., Dexiotricha 59 ' S piro stomum caudatum 4l
Saprodinium 12, 54 sp., Dexiotrichides 59 Spirostomum filum 47
Saprodinium dentatum 41 sp., Enchelys 253 S piro stomum intermedium 47
Saprodinium dfficile 47 sp.,, Epalxella 59 Spirostomum minus 4J
S ap r o di nium mime t i c um 4J sp., Frontonia lJ3 Spirostomum teres 4J , 53, 58
sapropelica, Balanonema 3l , 5l sp., H istiobalantium 59, 424,, 425, 433 Spirotricha teres 47
sapropelica, Caenomorpha 3l sp., Lagynophrya 259 Spirotrichea 553
sapropelica, Lacrymaria 42 sp., Mesodinium 137 , l4l Spirozona 12
sapropelica, Stichotricha aculeata 48 sp., Microthorax 59 Spirozona caudata 48
saprophila, Tillina I l4 sp., Monodinium 199 spp., Actinobolina 30
saprophila, U rotricha 50 sp., Oxytricha 59 spp., Actinobolus 36
Saprophilus mus c orum 4'7 sp., Paradileptus 223 spp., Askenasia 151, l6l, 162, 763,555,
sapropltilus, Lembus 43 sp., Podophrya 68l ,102 560, 561,5J0,606,609
sassykensis, P lagiocampa 46 sp., S/ro hilidium 120 spp., Bursaridium 692
S athrophilus muscorum 4J sp., Urotricha 59, 369 spp., Bursellopsis 30
Sathrophilus putrinus 47 spaniopo gon, B ursellopsis 39 l, 392, 393 spp., Colpidium ll3
schewiakowii, Bursaridium I l0 spathidiid 111 spp., Cyclidium 561
scintillans, Glaucoma 41, 214 Spathidiida I ll,23B spp., Cyclotrichium 206
scuticociliates 59 ,, 60J , I20 , I33 Spathidioide s sulcata 4J spp., Didinium 39, 178,204
Scuticocrhatrda 12 Spathidiosus bursa 4J spp., Epistylis 452
sctttttm, Diophrys 40 Spathidium 12,238 spp., Frontonia 409, 414
Scyphidia 535 Spathidium campane lla 4J spp., Halteria 567 , 569, 570
Scyphidia physarum 4J Spathidium faurei 47 spp., Hypotrichidium 683
Scyphidia pyrformis 535 S p athidium lieb e rkue hni 4l spp., Limnostromhidium 5J 5, 586, 590
S cyphidia pyriformis, Rhabdo sty la 535 Spathidium melophorme 4J spp., Mesodinium 29, l4B, 15 1 , 155, 16l ,
Scyphidia rugosa 452 S pathidium mo niliforme 47 162,163, 555, 560, 561,570
se cunda, Stichotric ha 48 Spathidium porculus 4J spp., Monodinium 39, 178, 198,202,214
semiciliatLtm, Tintinnidium 48, 49, 553, 6ll, Spathidium spathula 4l spp., Ophrydium 30,452
789

Index
spp., Paramet'ium 212, 411 , 421 striata, Epalxella 40 sulcata, Aspidisca 36
spp., P e lagohalteria 556 striata, Mesodinium pulex 141 sulcata, S pathidi oide s 47
spp., P elagostrombidium 57 4, 57 8, 586 striata, V ortic e lla 486 sulcatunt, Strombidion 585
spp., Pleuronema 424 striatus, Coleps 38 sul c'atunt, Strombidi unt 48
spp., P s e udo hap loc aul us 49 I striatus, Loxodes 43, 53, 58 sulcatus, P seudoprorodon 46
spp., Rimo st romb idium 51 8, 586 striatus, Metopus 44 Sulcigera L'omosa 49
spp., stentor 656 striatus, Plac:us 46 Synhymenüdae 12
spp., Uron'i<ha30,720 stric:ta, Chaenea 37 ») nut'ap ha ga, U rotri cha 21 2
spp., Vorticella 452 strobilidiids 595, 604, 609
spumacola, P latyophrya 46 Strobilidium 137 , 142, 578,586, 595, 604 T
spumosa, Bursella 3'72 S tr o h i I i d i u nt ac uminatum 48
spumosa, Bursellopsis 3'7, 37 1, 372, 375, Strobilidium armeniensis 595 Tac:hysonru pellionellum 45, 49
384,392 Strobilidium c:audatum 48, 53, 58, 432, 553, tamari, Membranicola 43, 626, 636, 638,
spumosa, P hysalophrya 46 5JB, 586, 595, 596, 604, 605 643, 649
stagnale, Condylostoma 655, 656 Strobilidium cometa 48 tardum, Condylostoma 38, 656
Staurophrya 727 Strohilidium c onicum 48 tartari, Stentor 662, 665
Staurophrya ele gans 48, 7 23, 7 25, 7 27 Strobilidium gyrans 48 te le sc'opoi de s, V ortice lla 5 |
steini, Blepharisma 31 S tr o h i I i d i um he xaki ne tum 606, 607 T e lotr oc' h i d i um 468, 47 0
steini, C hilodone lla 38 Strohilidium humile 48, 6ll T e I otr oc' h idi unt he nn e g uy i 467
steini, Colpoda 7 l4 S trobilidium hyalinum 609 T e ntac ul ife ra mexi c' ana 221, 222, 225
steini, Trithigmostoma 38, 50 Strobilidium lacustris 596 tenuicollis, Halteria 139, 140
Steinia platystoma 48 S tr o h i I id i um min imum 48 teres, Chaenea 37
steinii piekarskii, Colpoda 7 17 Strobilidiunt oculatum 48 teres, H olophrya 42, 46, 59
steinä, C olpoda 38, 692, 7 14 Strohilidium sp.720 teres, Prorodon 46
steinii, G astrosty la 4l Strobilidium velox 48, 596, 604 teres, Spirostomum 47, 53, 58
steinii, Paracolpoda 7 l4 strombidiids 214, 585 teres, Spirotricha 4l
stellaris, Askenasia 36, 148, 151, 155, l6l Strombidinopsis claparedei 48 terricola, Condylostorua 655, 656
Stenosemella lacustris 48, 618, 638, 643, Strombidinopsis gyrans 48 terricola, (Jrotricha 301
649 Strombidinopsis seti gera 48 terricola, Vaginicola 5 I
Stentor ll, 12, 18, 553, 662 Strombidion sulcatum 585 tetraedrica, Disematostoma 414
Stentor amethystinus 48, 553, 662, 664, Strombidium I3J, 142,, 585 tetraedrica, Disematostonta Leucophrys 414
61 t, 612 Stromhidium acutum 48 tetrae dric:a, Leuc'ophry s 4l 4
Stentor andreseni 665 Strombidium conicoide s 48 tetraedricum, Disematostoma 40, 409, 414,
Stentor araucanus 48, 56, 553,662,665, S tr omb i di um c'y c I i ndr o m orp hun 48 431, 440
668,671 Stromhidium delicatissimum 48 Tetrahyntena 12, 16, 43,212
Stentor baicalius 663 Stromhidium elatum 48 Tetrahymena corlissi 49
Stentor harretti 662 Strombidium gyrans 48 T en'ahyntena mobili s 240
Stentor caudatus 662 Strombidium lagenula 48 Tetrahymena patula 43
Stentor coeruleus 48, 53, 58, 656, 663,61 I, Stromhidium mirabile 48, 585, 590 Tetrahyntena pyriforntis 47, lJ3, lB4, 2J5,
612 Strombidium p e lagicunt 51 4 651
Stentor elegans 662 Strombidium pelagoviride 51 4 Tetrahynlena pyriforntis complex 41, 49, 7 19
Stentor foliginosus 662,664, 665 Strombidiunt P s ilotric ha f'allax 585 Tetrahynte na rostrata 58
Stentor gallinulus 48 Strombidium purpureum 4 Tetrahyntena setosa 41, 49
Stentor igneus 48,663 Strombidium rehwaldi 578, 586 Tetrahym enina 12
Stentor inü'oversus 663 Stromhidi um su I t'atum 48 tetraurelia, P arame c'ium lJ 3
Stentor loricatus 662 Strombidium tintinnoide s 48 T e tre adrop hrya p lan c' to n i c'a 49
Stentor mue lleri 48, 656, 662 Strontbidium turbo 48 Teuthophryidae 238
Stentor ntultiformis 48, 663, 6'71 Strombidi um ve stitum 48 Teuthophrys 111,238
St e ntor mu ltimi c ronuc I e atus 662 Strombidium viride 30, 48, 5JJ , 579, 585 Teuthophrys af ic'ana 238
Stentor niger 48,663, 664, 665, 667 Strombidium viride pelagica 51 4, 571 Teuthophrys trisulca 21 ,30,238
St e ntor po ly ntorp hus 48, 53, 662 Strongylidittm cras sum 48 Teuthophrys trisulca africana 49, 126,238
Stentor pyriformis 662 Stron gyl idium labiatum 48 Teuthophrys trisulca trisulca 49, 238
S te ntor roe se lii 48, 53, 58, 662 Strongylidium lanc e olatum 48 T e uthop hry s tri s ul c ata 239
Stentor spp.656 Styloc omete s di gitatus 48 Teutophrys 238
Stentor tärtari 662, 665 Stylonyc'hia 114,553 T e utop h ry s africanus 238
S t e rki e I la hi.s tt'i omus c orum 42 S tylonyc'hia histrio 48 T eutop hry s trisulca 238
S ti t' hon"i t' ha ac u I e ata 48 Sty lonyc hia makrostyla 48 Thi gmogaster potamophilus 49
S tic ho tt' ic ha ac ul e ata sap rop e I ica 48 Stylonyc'hia mytilzs complex 49,53, 685 T h ut' i c' o la .fo lli c ul ata 49
Stichotric ha .s ec unda 48 S ty lo ny c: h ia notophora 49 Thylac'idiunt pseudobursaria, Bursaridium
Stoke sia 12, 18, 4 1 4, 439 S ty lo ny c' hi a p ustulata 49 109
Stoke sia C y c I otri c hium v ernali s 439 S ty lo ny c' hia putrina 49 T hy lac' i dium trunc aturu 49
Stokesia vernalis 27,30, 48,212, 4O9, 4Il, subpi sti llunt, Tintinnopsi s 49 Thylakidium I l0
414,415,431,439 succisa, Psilotricha 41 ,50 T hy la ki d ium p s e udobu r sar i a I 09
stokesii, Sphaerophrya 35, 41, 443 Suctoria 12,30, 54, ll3, 68l ,723 Thylalcidium pseudobursaria, Bursaridium
striata octava, Vortic e lla 5 l, 486 suctorian 36, 54, 112,,133 109
790

Index
tigrina, O phryo glena 45 Trachelocerca 12 tuhulosa minima, Tintinnopsis 49
Tillina ntagna 49 trac he lo ide s, Amphile ptus 232 tubulosa, Tintinnop s is 49
Tillina saprophila 1 l4 Trachelophyllum 258 tumida, Nassula 44
Tintinidiopsis lacustris 617 Trachelophyllum apiculatum 49, 59, 262 Turaniella vitrea 50
tintinnabulum, Glos satella 4l Trache lophyllum chile nse 49 turbo, Strombidium 48
Tintinni düdae 626 T rac: he I o p hy llum c I av at um 49 turho, Urocentrum 50, 53
Tintinnidium 12, 553, 626, 636, 649 T rac he I op hy llum Jlav ic ans 49 turrita, Aspidisca 36
Tintinnidium ephemeridum 49, 62J, 636, Trac he lophy llum line ar e 262
649, 651 Trac he lop hy llum pusillum 49 u
Tintinnidium fluviatile 4, 35, 49, 626, 62J,, Trac he lophy llum si gmoide s 49, 262
637 , 642, 643., 644, 650 T rac he I o p hy I lum v e s t itum 262 umhellaria, Campanella 3J , 40, 452, 468
Tintinnidium fluviatile cylindrica 49, 628, tranquilla, D exiotricha 5J umbe llaria, E pisty lis 40
637 , 638 transvet'sa, Zosterodasy s 44, 52 unc'inata, Chilodonella 38, 53
Tintinnidium fluviatile minima 49 tricha, Urotricha 301 , 303 ,309,3 10, 3 l3 uncinatus, Coleps 38
T i nt i nni di um fl uv i at i I i s 631 trichium, P aramecium 45 undulans, B othrostoma 3J
T intinnidium inquilinum 631 Trichodina 12, l4B, l5l, 1 55, 472 uniserialis, Caenomorpha 31 ,5l
Tintinnidium muc ic ola 637 Trichodina domerguei 412, 413 Urceloaria 473
Tintinnidium pusillum 49, 5J , 58,206, 62J , Trichodina domerguei diaptomus 47 3 urc e olata, Epistylis 40
638, 642,648,649,652 Trichodina domer guei domer guei 41 4 Urnula epistylidis 50
Tintinnidium semiciliatum 48, 49, 553,611, Trichodina domerguei megamicronucleata (Jrocentrum ll4
637 ,638, 643, 649 49,58,4J2,413,419 Uroc'entrum turbo 50, 53
tintinnids 30, 586, 59J ,626,621 Trichodina grandinella 559 Uroleptus contortus 50
tintinnoides, Strombidium 48 Tric hodina mutabilis 41 3 Uroleptus dispar 50
Tintinnopsis 638, 643, 648 Tric'hodina nigra 473 Uroleptus musculus 45
T intinnop s is amphora 648 Trichodina pediculus 50, 450, 472 Uroleptus piscis 50
Tintinnopsis conus 49 Trichodina volvox 154 Uroleptus zignis 50
Tintinnopsis cratera 49 Trichodina zambeziensis 47 3 Uronema 12,20
Tintinnopsis cylindrata 49, 62J, 636, 638, Trichope lma euglenivora 50 Uronema dubium 50
642,643,649 Trichopelma opaca 50 [Jronema halophila 50 ,
Tintinnop s is cy lindric a 648 Trichophrya epistylides 50 (Jronema marinum 50
Tintinnopsis davidoffii cylindrica minima 49 Trichospira 54 (Jronema nigricans 39,50, 5B
T i nti nno p s i s formo s a 49 Trichospira inversa 50 Urosoma acuminata 685
TT ii nn tt ii nn nn oo pp s s i sis f iu lls in i ofo isrm eni ss i s6 4 68 4, 86 , 5 6 I 5 I T trr icic hh oo ts ut s o , m Ca ot la e p1 s2 38 U (Jr ro os so om na t ac i Pen ak rao sw ts rok mii 5 b0 id, i6 u1 m2 planc'tonicunt
Tintinnop sis karaj ac e nsi s 49 Triloha paradoxa 238, 239 , 242 685
Tintinnop sis karaj ac e ns is minima 49 Trimyema 54 U r o s oma p lanc'to n i c: a 685
Tintinnopsis lacustri s 650 Trimyema compressum 50 U r o s o nta p lanc t o ni c' um 685
Tintinnopsis lacustris laevis 6ll tristicha, Urotricha matthesi 50, 59, 301, U rosoma planc'toni sum 685
Tintinnopsis lacustris reticulata 6lJ 302,303, 313, 340, 342, 348 (J rosoma planc'tonticum 50
Tintinnopsis lobiancoi .fhsiJ'ormis minima 49 trisulca africana, Teuthophrys 49, 126, 238 Urospina bicaudata 50
Tintinnopsis meunieri minima 49 trisulca tris ulca, T e uthophry s 49, 238 Urostyla 16, 553
T intinnop s i s potiformi s 49 trisulca, Teuthophrys 27 ,,30,238 Urostyla grandis 50
TT ii nn tt ii nn nn oo pp s s i si s p siy nr eif no sr im s i 4s 9 49 t trr ii s s u ull c c a a, , TT ee uu t t oh po hp rh yr y s 2s 3tr 8isulc a 49, 238 UUr ro os trt iy cla h aw e 7i ,s s 9e ,i 5 10 2, 16, 18, l3J, 142,, l5J,
T intinno p s i s s ubpi s t il lum 49 tr i s ul c ata, T e uthop hry s 239 159, 266,, 2J2,301, 324, 363, 36J, 368,
Tintinnopsis tubulosa 49 trisulcatus, E uplotes 4l 369, 370, 390, 392, 395, 396, 3gJ ,, 3gg,
Tintinnopsis tubulosa minima 49 Trithigmostoma 692 402,120
Tintinnopsis wangi 49 Trithigmostoma cuc:ullulus 3J ,50, 53 , 692 Urotricha agilis 50, 348, 352
Tintinnopsis wrayi 49, 648, 65 I Trithigmostoma steini 38, 50 U rotric:ha alve olata 395
Tintinnus c:ratera, Codonella Dffiugia 617 Trithigmostometum cucullula e 692 (lrotricha apsheronica 50, 58, 301, 302,
T inti nnus Jl uv iatilis 637 Trochilia 12, 692 309, 310, 31 l, 312, 313, 315, 315, 316,
tisiae, Hypotrichidium 6ll , 619 Trochilia minuta 50 331,334,335,340,342
T okophr"ya carche sii 49, 526 Tropidoatractus 54 U rotric ha armata 50, 359 , 360
Tokophrya cyclopum 49 Tropidoatractus acuminatus 50 U rotricha B alanitozoon, agilis 348
Tokophrya lemnaruruJII trunc'ata, Acineta 36 U rotric' ha balti c'a 301
Tokophrya ornata 49 trunc'ata, Bursella Holophrya 391 Urotricha castalia 50, 58, 301, 302, 303,
T o kop h r"y a q uadr i p at't ita 49 truncata, Bursellopsis 3J , 325, 37 l, 3J 5, 309, 3 10, 3 I l, 313, 325, 335, 340, 342
torttts, Metopus pulcher 44 3J8,383,384,391 U rotric:ha c' orli s s iana 359, 360
Tracheliidae 232 truncata, H olophrya 39 | U rotric ha cy rto n u c I e ata 30 I
tr ctc he I i o ide s, Amp hil e p tus 232 truncata, M etacy stis 43 U rotricha dragesc'oi 50, 359,360, 361
trache lioides, Amphileptus D ileptus 232 trunc'atella, Bursaria 31 ,51 ,683 Urotricha farcta 50, 59, 351, 35J, 360, 432
trac he I ioide s, D ileptus 40, 232 t r unc at um, T hy lac idi um 49 U rotricha faurei 30 l, 335, 336, 340, 342
trachelioides, Pelagodileptus 40, 45, 58, tuamotuensis, Mycterothrix 44 Urotricha furcata 50, 59, 344, 34J, 348,
222, 223, 229,231 , 232 tuberosa, Acineta 36 352,35J ,360, 365, 601 ,120
Trac'helilts ovum 49, 53,234,236 tubic' olanatans, S p ir ofilum 4l Urotricha globosa 50, 352, 357
t9r

Index
U rotricha halteriifurmis 5O vermicularis, Enchelyomorpha 40 V ortice lla apuntata 494
Urotricha lemani 359 vermicularis, Enchelys 40 V ortic e lla aqua-dulc is 486
Urotricha macrostoma 50, 344, 346, 347 vermicularis, Lacrymaria 42 Vorticella aquadalcis complex 51, 59, 450,
arobicha matthesi 335, 340,352 vermicularis, P hialina 42 452, 486, 495
arofficha matthesi matthesi 50,301, 302, vermiculus, Spathidium 4l V ortic e lla aquadulcis-Komplex 486
303,313,340,342,343 v ermiforme, C ardio stomate lla 3l V ortic ella astyliformis 486
aroticha matthesi tristicha 50, 59, 301, verminus, Cohnilemhus 38,, 43 V ortic ella bivacuolum 495
302, 303, 3 13, 340, 342, 348 v ernalis, Cy clotrichium 439 Vorticella bosminae 5l
U rotricha minkewic kzi 35 I vernalis, Frontonia 41, 416 Vorticella brevistyla 5 I
Urotricha multisetosa 301, 316, 335, 336, vernalis, Stokesia 2J , 30, 48, 2J2, 409, 4Il, vorticella, B ursaria 655
340,342 414, 415, 431, 439 Vorticella campanula 3 1, 5 1,, 53, 59
Urotric ha nais 5O, 348, 357 vernalis, Stokesia Cyclotrichium 439 Vorticella chlorellata 5 l, 480, 482, 491,
Urotricha obliqua 50 vernalis, Vorticella 51, 53, 4BJ ,, 494 502,503
Urotricha ondina 357 versatile, Cyclidium 39 Vorticella chlorostigma 491, 492
U rotric ha ovata 50, 349, 352, 360, 361 versatile, Ophrydium 44, 223, 450, 540, Vorticella citrina 5l
U rotric ha parvula 35 l, 352, 354 543, 55 1 vorticella, Condylostoma 38, 655
Urotricha pelagica 50, 59, 301, 302, 303, versatilis, V orticella 543 vorticella, C ondylostoma B ursaria 655
307, 309, 3 13, 3t6, 335, 340, 342, 432 v e siculatus, P s eudoprorodon 4l Vorticella conochili 31, 51
a rotic ha platy stoma 352, 359 vesiculosus, Litonotus 43 Vorticella conosoma 5l
U rotric ha p s e udofurcata 3 44, 347 vestibuliferid 252 Vorticella convallaria 450,, 495
Urotricha pusilla 30 I , 335 vestita, Pseudovorticella 41 ,5l Vorticella convallaria complex 51,, 53, 59,
Urotricha puytoraci 368 vestita, Vorticella 51 495
Urotricha ristoi 357 , 607 v e stitum, Strombidium 48 Vorticella convallaria natans 482
U rotric ha rotunda 335, 336, 337 v e s t it um, T r ac he I o p hy I I um 262 Vorticella costata 486
Urotricha saprophila 50 V io s oma planctonicum 685 Vorticella cupfera 5l
Urotricha simonsbergeri 50, 301, 302,308, virens, Climacostomum 38, 656 V orticella cyclopicola 5l
316,324 viride pelagica, Strombidium 51 4, 517 Vorticella dilatata 5l
[Jrotricha sp. 59, 369 viride, Cyclotrichium 39, 205,, 213, 274, Vorticella dimorpha 5l
Urotricha sphaerica 357 , 358,368 373, 432 V ortic e lla fas c ic ulata 5 l
Urotricha spp.30,720 viride, Limnostrombidium 4, 35, 43, 48, 58, V ortic e lla frome nte li 5 |
U rotri c ha synurap ha ga 27 2 199, 203, 205, 206, 20J , 310, 432, 5J4, Vorticella globosa 5l
U rotricha terricola 301 5J5,577,661 Vorticella gracilis 51
Urotricha tricha 301, 303, 309, 310, 313 viride, Spathidium 47 Vorticella hyalina 51, 495
Urotrtcha vali.da 5O, 3Ol, 3O2, 303, 309, viride, Strombidium 30, 48, 5JJ , 519, 585 Vorticella incisa 5l
313, 315, 316, 335, 340, 342 viridis, Coleps 38,284 Vorticella infusionum complex 5I, 481
Urotricha venatrix 50, 59, 301, 302,303, viridis, Foissneria 41 Vorticella kahli 486
309, 313, 315, 325, 331, 332, 335, 340, viridis, Furgasonia 4l Vorticella kahlü 486
342 viridis, H istiobalantium 42 V ortic ella late striata 486
Urotricha vitrea 357 viridis, Lilümorpha 30, 43, 56, L64 vorticella, Linostoma 655
Urozona buetschlii 50 viridis, Liliomorpha 164 vorticella, Linostomella 38, 43, 432, 553,
utric ular iae, O p hryo gle na 45 viridis, Pelagohalteria 4, 27, 45, 56, 58, 655, 683,1 l0
555, 559,560, 566, 567, 569 V ortic ella longifilum 5 I
v viridis, Prorodon 46, 40i2 V orticella mar garitata 5 I
virids, C oleps hirtus 4, 2J ,, 38, 5J , 27 3 , 2J 5 , V orticella mar garitata chlorelli gera 492
vaga, Cothurniopsis 39 281,284,,288 Vorticella mar ginata 5 |
vagans, Astylozoon 453, 456 vitrea, Turaniella 50 Vorticella marina 5l
Vaginicola crystallina 31, 50 vitrea, Urotricha 351 Vorticella mayeri 51, 480
Vaginicola ingenita 5O volvox, Askenasia 36, 4I, 57 , 748, 150, 15 1, Vorticella microscopica 5 I
vaginicola, Lagenophrys 42 153,154, 16l Vorticella microstoma complex 5l , 53, 4Bl
Vaginicola longicolis 50 volvox, Askenasia Halteria 154 Vorticella monilata 51, 503
Vaginicola terricola 5 I volvox, Halteria 41 Vorticella mutans 5l
valida, Urotricha 50, 301, 302,303,309, volvox, Trichodina 154 Vorticella nasuta lJ I
313, 3 15, 316, 335, 340, 342 vorax, Actinobolina 36, ll2, ll3,ll4,, lI8, Vorticella natans 51, 480, 482
variabili s, Episty lis 40, 5 16 123, 124, 125, 126 Vorticella nebulifera 5 I
varians, Zoothamnium 52 vorax, Actinobolus 1 1B Vorticella octava 486
Vasicola lutea 5l yorax, C hilodontopsis 38 Vorticella octava complex 51, 481
velox, Mesodinium 136,138, 140 vorax, C ondylostoma 656 Vorticella octava costata 486
velox, Rimostrombidium 47, 48, 310, 595, yorax, Monodinium 183 Vorticella pelagica 5l
596,604,606,61 1 vorax, Nassulopsis 44 vorticella, Phascolodon 45, 432, 693
velox, Strobilidium 48, 596,604 vorai, Ophryoglena 45 Vorticella picta 51, 495, 496, 498
venatrit, Urotricha 50, 59, 301, 302,303, Vorticella 12, 16, 59, 293, 450, 452, 480, Vorticella piriformis 535, 531
309, 3t3, 3L5, 325, 33t, 332, 335, 340, 482, 486, 495, 501, 501, 132 V orticella platy soma 486
342 Vorticella alba 5I Vorticella putrina 51
venusta, Vorticella 5l Vorticella anastatica 5 l, 5 I 5 V ortic ella rhahdostyloides 5 1
v ermic ulare, H omalozoo n 42, 58 Vorticella anastatica, E pistylis 5 l 5 Vorticella similis 5l
192

Index
Vorticella sphaerica 31, 5l W enrichia c'olpidioide s 5 | Zoothamnium arhuscula 51, 450
Vortic'ella spp. 452 wenrichä, Actinobolina 36, I 13, 1 15, 1 l B, Zoothamnium elegans 52
Vorticella striata 486 123 Zoothamnium limnetic um 52, 508
Vorticella striata octava 51, 486 Woodrffia 12 Zoothamnium minintum 52
V ortic ella te le sc'opoide s 5 I Woodruftia rostrata 5l Zoothamnium p e ctinatum 52, 508
Vortic'ella venusta 5l wrayi, Tintinnopsis 49, 648, 651 Zoothamnium p e c tinatum, C arc he sium 508
Vorticella vernalis 51, 53, 481 , 494 Zoothamnium ramos is s imum 52
V ortic ella v ersatilis 543 x Zoothamnium simplex 52
Vorticella vestita 5l Zoothamnium varians 52
vorticellids 120 rantha, Obertrumia I0l Zosterodasys 692
Zosterodasys agamalievi 52
w Z Zosterodasy s transversa 44, 52
Zosterograptus 700
wangi, Tintinnopsis 49 zamheziensis, Trichodina 41 3 zschokkei, Epistylis 4l
weissei, Paraurostyla 45, 50 zignis, Uroleptus 50
weissei, Urostyla 50 Zoothamniunt 452
793



Informationsberichte des Bayerischen Landesamtes für
0ll
Wasserwirtschaft (IS SN 6-4217)
Die Hefte der Reihe Informationsberichte des Bayerischen Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft können - sofern nicht
vergriffen - gegen Rechnung beim Wasserwirtschaftsamt Deggendorf, Postfach 2060, 94460 Deggendorf bezogen
werden. Ein Verzeichnis der vom Bayer. Landesamt für Wasserwirtschaft herausgegebenen Schriften mit Bezugs-
preisen wird auf Anforderung zugesandt.
In der Reihe Informationsberichte des Bayerischen Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft sind bisher folgende Hefte
erschienen:
Heft ll7 5 Arbeitsbesprechung über Fragen der Abwassertechnik und der Gewässergütewirtschaft - Grundwasser-
schutz. Referate zur Arbeitsbesprechung am20.März 1975 in München.
}Jeft 217 5 Arbeitsbesprechung über Fragen der Abwassertechnik und der Gewässergütewirtschaft Grundwasser-
schutz. Einzelbeiträge und Diskussionsergebnisse zur Arbeitsbesprechung am 20.März 1975 in
München.
Heft3l75 Karten der Grundwasserhöhengleichen. Isartal - von Dingolfing bis Landau.
Heft 4175 Karten der Grundwasserhöhengleichen. Donautal - von Regensburg bis Straubing.
Heft 5175 Hinweise zu den neuen ATV-Richtlinien für Regenentlastungen.
Heft U76 Gewässerkundliche Arbeitstagung 197 5. Einzelbeiträge und Diskussionsergebnisse.
Heft2176 Einführung in die statistische Analyse von Zeitreihen.
Heft3176 Auswertung von hydrogeologischen und wasserwirtschaftlichen Daten mit einem Rechenprogramm.
Automatische Auswertung und Darstellung von hydrogeologischen und wasserwirtschaftlichen Daten am
Beispiel der nördlichen Münchener Schotterebene mit Hilfe des MBB-Rechenprogrammes.
Heft 4176 Wasserwirtschaft im ländlichen Raum. Dienstbesprechwg 1976.
Heft 5176 Wasserwirtschaftliche Aufgaben in Bayem. Vorträge, Veröffentlichungen.
Heft 6176 Arbeitsbesprechung über Fragen der Abwassertechnik und der Gewässergütewirtschaft - Kanalisations-
technik. Einzelbeiträge und Diskussionsergebnisse zur Arbeitsbesprechung am25.März 1976 tn
München.
Heft U77 Die Trockenperiode des Jahres 1976.
Heft2177 Talsperren undRückhaltebecken. Dienstbesprechung 1976.
Heft 3177 Arbeitsbesprechung über Fragen der Abwassertechnik und der Gewässergütewirtschaft - Kanalisation
und Grundstücksentwässerung. Einzelbeiträge und Diskussionsergebnisse zur Arbeitsbesprechung am
24.l|lIärz 1977 in München.
Heft 4177 Beiträge und Gebühren in der Abwasserbeseitigung in Bayem. Stand 1976177.
Heft 5177 Erfassung, Verarbeitung und Archivierung von Beschaffenheitsdaten mit einer Rechenanlage der
mittleren Datentechnik. Teil 1.
Heft 6177 Gütezustand der bayerischen Gewässer und Stand der Abwasserbeseitigung Ende 1976.
Heft.7177 Lagern, Befordern, Abfüllen und Umschlagen wassergeführdender Stoffe. Dienstbesprechung 1977.
Heft 8177 Karten der Grundwasserhöhengleichen. Donautal - von der Lechmündung bis Ingolstadt.
1/78
Heft Arbeitsbesprechung über Fragen der Wasserversorgung. Einzelbeiträge und Diskussionsergebnisse der
Arbeitsbesprechung am 22. September 1977 im Bayer. Landesamt für Wasserwirtschaft.
Heft2178 Meßtechnik, Automation und Datenverarbeitung bei der Gewässerüberwachung. Vorträge des fach-
technischen Seminars vom 9. bis 10. Mai 1978.
Heft 3/78 Untersuchungen zur Verbesserung der Leistung und Wirtschaftlichkeit kommunaler Abwasser-
reinigungsanlagen.
Heft 4178 Mathematisches Grundwassermodell im Gebiet der Lechmündung.
Heft 5/78 Planungshilfen für die Gestaltung von Regenüberlaufbecken.

Heft6178 Limnologische Untersuchungen des Ammersees. Sept. 1975 bis Dez. 1976.
Heft7178 Wasserwirtschaftliche Aufgaben in Bayern - aus dem Aufgabenbereich des Bayer. Landesamtes für
Wasserwirtschaft. Vorträge des fachtechnischen Seminars vom 13. September 1978.
Heft 8/78 Wasserwirtschaft im ländlichen Raum. Dienstbesprechung 1978.
Heft9178 Erfassung, Verarbeitung und Archivierung von Beschaffenheitsdaten mit einer Rechenanlage der
mittleren Datentechnik. Teil 2.
Heft ll79 Wasserwirtschaftliche Aufgaben in Bayern. Vorhäge, Veröffentlichungen.
Heft2l79 Anwendung der Dräntechnik. Ergebnisse von Untersuchungen und Ortsbesichtigungen in Drän-Problem-
gebieten und deren Nutzanwendung flir den Wasserwirtschaftler.
Heft3179 100 Jahre Bayerisches Landesamt für Wasserwirtschaft. Bericht über die Festveranstaltungen.
Heft 4179 Erfassung, Verarbeitung und Archivierung von Beschaffenheitsdaten mit einer Rechenanlage der
mittleren Datentechnik. Teil 3.
Heft 5179 Orohydrographische Analyse. Analyse der Strömungsverhältnisse des Bodenwassers und deren Nutz-
anwendung zur Bodenwasserregelung mit Hilfe der Höhenflurkarte.
Heft 6179 Talsperren und Rückhaltebecken. Dienstbesprechung 1978.
Heft l/80 Arbeitsbesprechung über Fragen der Abwassertechnik und der Gewäi; s,, sergütewirtschaft am
22. November 1979.
Heft 2/80 Die flußmorphologische Entwicklung der Salzach von der Saalachmündung bis zur Mündung in den Inn.
Heft 3/80 Wasserwirtschaftliche Forschung und Praxis. Statusseminar aus der Arbeit wasserwirtschaftlicher
Institutionen in Bayem am 17. und 18. April 1980.
Heft 4/80 Graphische Ermiulung der Gleichgewichtstemperatur J* und des Wärmeaustauschkoeffizienten K bei
Wärmehaushaltsberechnungen nach der Exponentialmethode.
Heft 5/80 Praxisnahe Erprobung vereinfachter CSB-Methoden und Vergleich mit der CSB-Schiedsmethode.
Heft l/81 Untersuchungen über die Wirtschaftlichkeit der Faulgasverwertung auf Kläranlagen.
Heft2l8l Monetäre Bewerhrng wasserwirtschaftlicher Maßnahmen - Systematik dervolkswirtschaftlichen
Nutzenermittlung.
Heft 3/81 Arbeitsbesprechung mit den Wasserwirtschaftsämtem über Fragen der Wasserversorgung am
1980.
16. Oktober
.:
Heft 4/81 Geschichtliche Entwicklung der Wasserwirtschaft und des Wasserbaus in Bayem. Seminar am
30. April 1981, Teil l.
Heft 5/81 Geschichtliche Entwicklung der Wasserwirtschaft und des Wasserbaus in Bayem. Seminar am
30. April 1981, Teil 2.
Heft 6/81 Möglichkeiten der Bilanzierung und Minderung der Bodenerosion und der Oberflächenabflüsse von
landwirtschaft lichen Nutzfl ächen.
Heft T l9l Talsperren und Rückhaltebecken. Dienstbesprechung 1 98 L
Heft B/B 1 Einfluß von Schneefeldsprengungen aufdie Erosion. Kolloquium vom 2. bis 3. Juli 1980.
Heft ll\2 Beiträge zur Limnologie bayerischer Seen.
Heft 2lB2 Stoffkreisläufe in Binnengewässern.
Heft 3182 Zur Limnologie des Starnberger Sees.
Heft 4lB2 Gütezustand der bayerischen Gewässer und Stand der Abwasserbeseitigung Ende I 98 1 .
Heft 5lB2 Wärmehaushalt und Wassergüte in Fließgewässern. Zusammenhänge zwischen Wärmehaushalt und
Wassergüte in Fließgewässern unter besonderer Berücksichtigung des Zusammenwirkens von Ab-
wasserreinigung und Abwärmeminderung
IJeft.6182 Die mittel- und langfristige Trink- und Brauchwasserversorgung in Bayern.
Heft 1/83 Wasserwirtschaft in Bayem - aus dem Arbeitsbereich des Bayerischen Landesamtes flir Wasserwirtschaft.
Seminar am 8. Februar 1983, Teil 1.

Heft 2183 Wasserwirtschaft in Bayem - aus dem Arbeitsbereich des Bayerischen Landesamtes für Wasserwirtschaft.
Seminar am 8. Februar 1983,Tei12.
Heft 3183 Geschichtliche Entwicklung der Wasserwirtschaft und des Wasserbaus in Bayem. Seminar am
28. April 1983, Teil 1.
Heft 4183 Geschichtliche Entwicklung der Wasserwirtschaft und des Wasserbaus in Bayem. Seminar am
28. April 1983, Teil 2.
Heft 5183 Wirtschaftlichkeit des Einsatzes von Wärmepumpen auf Klärarlagen; Untersuchungen an Modellanlagen.
Heft 6183 Grundwassertemperaturen Mänchen.
Heft 7183 Die faunistische Erfassung ausgewählter Wasserinsektengruppen in Bayern (Eintagsfliegen, Libellen,
Steinfl iegen, Köcherfliegen, Zuckmücken).
Heft 8/83 Untersuchung zum Grundwasserhaushalt des Tiefenwassers der Oberen Süßwassermolasse durch
Grundwasseraltersbestimmung.
Heft 9183 Mathematische Verfahren und Modelle zur operationellen Abflußvorhersage - unter Berücksichtigung
des Überleitungssystems,,Donau-Main".
Heft l0/83 Technische Gewässeraufsicht - Gewässergüte. Dienstbesprechung vom 13. - 15. April 1983.
Heft ll84 Aktuelle Fragen der Gewässerkunde. Dienstbesprechung am 9. und 10. November 1983.
Heft 2184 Nährstoffaustrag aus landwirtschaftlich genutzten Flächen.
Heft 3184 Große tägliche Niederschlagshöhen in Bayem
Heft 4184 Limnochemische und limnobiologische Auswirkungen der Versauerung von kalkarmen Oberflächen-
gewässem. - Eine Literaturstudie.
Heft 5184 Beiträge und Gebühren in der Abwasserbeseitigung in Bayern. Stand 1983/84.
Heft 1/85 Biologische Gewässeranalyse in Bayern.
Heft 2185 Btx in der Informationsverarbeitung der Wasserwirtschaft.
Heft 3/85 Umwelprobleme und Betriebsfragen der Wasserversorgung.
Bayerisch-österreichischer Erfahrungsaustauscham27. und 28. Jlni 1985 in Passau.
Heft 4185 Erosionsversuche in Maiskulturen 1981 - 1984.
Heft 5/85 Trinkwasserschutzgebiete. Dienstbesprechupg am 19. und 20. September 1985.
Heft 1186 Geschichtliche Entwicklung der Wasserwirtschaft und des Wasserbaus in Bayern. Seminar am
24. April1986, Teil l.
Heft 2186 Geschichtliche Entwicklung der Wasserwirtschaft und des Wasserbaus in Bayern. Seminar am
24. April1986, Teil 2.
Heft 3186 Geschichtliche Entwicklung der Wasserwirtschaft und des Wasserbaus in Bayern. Seminar am
24. April1986, Teil 3.
Heft 4186 Die Makrophytenvegetation des Chiemsees.
Heft 5186 Das Hochwasser im bayerischen Inngebiet im August 1985.
Heft ll87 Planungshilfen für die Gestaltung von Regenüberlaufbecken.
Heft 2187 Limnologische Studien am Ammersee 1984 - 1986.
Heft 3187 Die Grundwassemeubildung in Bayern. Berechnet aus den Niedrigwasserabflüssen der oberirdischen
Gewässer.
Heft 4187 Kieselalgen bayerischer Gewässer.
Heft 5187 Grundwasserentnahmen und andere aktuelle Themen der Wasserversorgung.
Dienstbesprechung am 1. und 2. Juni 1987.
Heft 1/88 Die Makrophytenvegetation des Ammer-, Wörth- und Pilsensees sowie des Weßlinger Sees.
Heft 2188 Bestimmungsschlüssel für die Saprobier-DlN-Arten (Makroorganismen).
Heft 3/88 Anwendung von Geotextilien und Geogittern im Erd- und Wasserbau. Seminar arn26.l27.April 1988.

Heft l/89 Wasserwirtschaft und Naturhaushalt - Ausleitungsstrecken bei Wasserkraftanlagen.
Intemationales Symposium am 19. und 20. Jaruar 1989 im Europäischen Patentamt, München.
Heft 2189 Grundlagen des Wasserbaus - Aktuelle Beiträge.
Heft 3/89 Das Märzhochwasser 1988 in Bayern.
Heft 4189 Schutz vor Wildbächen und Lawinen Auswirkungen der Waldschäden.
Tagungsbericht zum Fachseminar am19.l20. April 1989.
Heft 5/89 Gehölze auf Deichen. Dokumentation von Baumwurzelaufgrabungen und Windwurf von Gehölzen.
Heft 1/90 Das mikroskopische Bild bei der aeroben Abwasserreinigung.
Heft2190 Die Makrophytenvegetation des Tegern-, Schlier- und fuegsees.
Heft 3/90 Schneebewegungen und Lawinentätigkeit in zerfallenden Bergwäldem. Fallstudie für den Landkreis
Oberallgäu.
Heft 4190 Biologische Gewässeranalyse in Bayern - Taxaliste der Gewässerorganismen.
Heft 1/91 Taxonomische und ökologische Revision der Ciliaten des Saprobiensystems.
Band I: Cyrtophorida, Oligotrichida, Hypotrichia, Colpodea.
Heft 2l9l Bemessungsniederschläge aus Regen und Schneeschmelze.
Heft 3l9l Untersuchungen zur Keimreduktion im gereinigten Abwasser durch UV-Bestrahlung.
Heft ll92 Beiträge und Gebühren für die Abwasserbeseitigung in Bayem. Stand 1991.
Heft 2192 Zur Limnologie des Chiemsees.
Heft 3192 Die limnologische Entwicklung des Stamberger Sees im Fortgang der Abwasserfernhaltung unter beson-
derer Berücksichtigung der Makrophytenvegetation.
Heft 4192 Untersuchungen zur Phosphorelimination in kommunalen Kläranlagen.
Heft 5192 Taxonomische und ökologische Revision der Ciliaten des Saprobiensystems.
Band II: Peritrichia, Heterotrichida, Odontostomatida.
Heft 6192 Nitrateintrag in das Grundwasser unter Waldgebieten in Bayem.
Heft 7192 Biologische Trophieindikation im Litoral von Seen.
Heft ll93 Richtlinien für den Bau von Anlagen zur Haltung von Nutzfischen (Teichbaurichtlinien).
Heft 2193 Biologische Aufbereitung von Tiefengrundwässern.
Heft 3193 Wasserbilanz Bayem.
Heft ll94 Taxonomische und ökologische Revision der Ciliaten des Saprobiensystems.
Band III: Hymenostomata, Prostomatida, Nassulida.
Heft2194 Ansatz und Methoden einer Analyse des Lawinengeschehens mit Hilfe eines Geographischen
Informationssystems.
Heft 3194 Stickstoffaustrag in das Grundwasser bei extensivierter Bodennutzung.
Heft ll95 Taxonomische und ökologische Revision der Ciliaten des Saprobiensystems.
Band IV: Gymnostomatea, Loxodes, Suctoria.
Heft 2195 Limnologische Entwicklung des Kochelsees 1979-1993.
Heft3/95
InternationalesSymposium.
Grundwasserversauerung durch atmosphärische Deposition
Ursachen - Auswirkungen Sanierungsstrategien - 26.-28. Oktober 1994,Bayre,üh, Deutschland.
Heft 4195 Neue Wege in der Gewässerpflege. Symposium 27.04.1995, München.
Heft 1196 Seen in Bayem - Limnologische Entwicklung von 1980 bis 1994.
Heft2196 KostenbewußteAbwasserentsorgung.
Heft 3196 Experimentelle Untersuchungen ar Trophieindikation anhand von Aufwuchsdiatomeen.
Heft 4196 Ökologische Typisierung der aquatischen Makrofauna

Heft 5196 Die Grundwasserneubildung in Bayern. Berechnet aus den Niedrigwasserabflüssen
der oberirdischen Gewässer.
Heft ll97 Grundwasserversauerung in Bayern.
Heft2l9l
LimnologischeForschungenam Chiemsee.
Heft l/98 Grundwasser in Bayern - Wasserbeschaffenheit 1993197.
Heft2198 Das Wildbachsystem, Prozesse Bewertung - Maßnahmen.
Fachkolloquium 14.- I 5. November 1 996, München.
Heft 3/98 Der Gewässerkundlicher Dienst Bayem
Heft 4198 Trophiekartierung von aufwuchs- und makrophytendominierten Fließgewässem.
Erarbeitung von Trophieindikationswerten für ausgewählte benthische Algen und Makrophyten
Heft ll99 Das mikroskopische Bild bei der biologischen Abwasserreinigung
Heft2199 Beiträge und Gebühren für Abwasserbeseitigung in Bayem Stand 1998
Heft3l99 Identification and Ecology of Limnetic Plankton Ciliates

