Bulletin of Zoological Nomenclature 59(3) September 2002 165
Neotypification of protists, especially ciliates (Protozoa, Ciliophora)
Wilhelm Foissner
Llniversität Salzburg, Institut für Zoolog ie, H e I lbrunners t rasse 3 4,
A-5020 Salzburg, Austria
Abstract. Historically, most soft-bodied species of heterotrophic protists (Protozoa)
have been difficult to preserve and consequently lack type material that can be
re-investigated. This causes taxonomic and nomenclatural problems and increases
the degree of subjectivity in the identification ol these organisms. There are hardly :
:
any ciliate species whose identity has not been queried, or will be disputed as new
data become available. However, recently methods have been developed that allow
ciliates (Ciliophora) to be preserved in a way that allows type material to be preserved
and re-examined. The current paper proposes that ciliate species are accurately
re-described and neotypes designated that can be preserved using the new methods.
The paper also proposes that the Commission should consider waiving Article 75.3.6
of the Fourth Edition of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (1999)
in relation to ciliates and other groups of protists and small Metazoa. This Article
states that neotypes should be designated from specimens that come as near as
practicable from the original type locality. The reasons why the Article should be
waived lor these organisms are discussed.
Keywords. Nomenclature; taxonomy; Protozoa; Ciliophora; protists; ciliates;
neotypification; type locality.
Introduction
This paper aims to stimulate discussion about the absence ol or inadequate quality
of type material lor protists, especially ciliates (Protozoa, Ciliophora). To date, this
importar-rt problen-r has been largely ignored by the scientists concerned and by the
scientific community in ger-reral. The lack of interest in protist nomenclatural
problems is illustrated by the low number of relevant cases published in the Bulletin
o.f Zoologicul Nomenclature and an ignorance olthe International Code of Zoological
Nomenclature displayed in recent publications by protozoologists. There are
probably two main reasons lor this: (i) there are very few people studying these
minute organisms and even f-ewer are interested in their alpha-taxonomy ar-rd
nomenclature, and (ii) there is a lack of type material, which causes nomenclatural
problems and leaves identification extremely subjective. Similar problems exist in
most 'microfaunal' groups and even more severely in the nematodes (Nematoda).
material
lnadequate type .
The lack ol type material is the result ol l"ristorical problems with the preservation
oI ciliate specimens and rnore than 90'Yu of all described ciliates lack type material.
Where it does exist, species are often represented by rnaterial that fails to sl'row the
diagnostic f-eatures. Further, in some cases material is dilhcult to obtain because it is
deposited in private collections (see Foissner & Pfister, 1997).

166 Bulletin ol'Zoological Nomenclaturc 59(3) Septcnrbcr 2002
The lack of type material is one of the most dimcult problems lacing proto-
zoologists involved in ciliate or other protozoan alpha-taxonomy. There are
ir.rnumerable examples ol poorly described species, doubtlul identifications, and
problematic redescriptions. Although n-ry own research group may recognize a
tlrorough redescription as 'authoritative', others rnay not. Berger (1999),lor example,
assigned Onychodrontopsis fiexili.s Stokes, 1887, accurately redescribed and neo-
typified by Petz & Foissner (1996), to Allotricha, a genus and species which has never
been illustrated or accurately described. Obviously, in the absence of reliabie type
material, no consensus can be reached and ciliate identification and nomenclature
must remain a matter of choice.
Improved methods for preserving ciliates
At present, most 'modern' ciliate types are deposited at two centres: the
Smithsonian Institution in the U.S.A. (Corliss, 1972;- Cole, 1994) and the Biology
Center olthe Museum of Upper Austria in Linz (Aescht, 1994). In the last 30 years,
protozoologists have developed improved methods for preserving these soft-bodied
organisms, allowing reliable type material to be obtained and preserved. Specimens
are impregnated with silver nitrate and/or protargol to show the arrangement of
somatic and oral cilia (known as infraciliature or the silverline system), which are
among the most important features in ciliate alpha-taxonomy (Foissner, 1991).
Under certain circumstances other methods such as the Feulger-r reaction are used to
examine tl.re main leatures in the nuclear apparatlrs.
Usually, light- and/or electron-microscopical micrographs and molecular data
alone ale not sufficient lor description ol species, but may add important additional
data to the inlormation available from conventional (silver) preparations. The
methods needed will depend on the group of protists under consideration. What is
irnportant is that the feature(s) mentioned in the description can be seen in the
designated type material. Often several 'holotype specimens' might be necessary
because not all I'eatures can be seen in a single specimen or preparation. Here, tl're
concept of the hapantotypes can be applied (Article 73.3).
A solution to taxonomic and nomenclatural difficulties in the ciliates
Many protist taxonomic and nomenclatural problems could be solved by the
provision ol type material using the new methods mentioned above. Tl.re present
practice of using illustrations as holotypes does not solve the underlying problen't
because these illustrations often cannot be examined to reveal new data when an
existing description is for"rnd to be incomplete or inaccurate. Fr-rrther, leatures which
are consiclered as unimportant at the time of description may later become decisive
taxononric characters lor comparison with new specics. Neotypification is the one
way to overcome these and related problems and to bring stability in ciliate
laxononry and identification. This was emphasized by Corliss (1912), who established
some ncotypes lor'difficult'ciliates in the sixties. Likewise, Medioli & Scott (1985)
established neotypes fbr some testate amocbae.
Gencrally, however, neotypification has not been practised widely in the protists.
It was only recer.rtly tl-rat rny own research group adopted this valuable approach to
clarilying protist laxonomy and nomenclature (Foissner, 1997, 1999b; Foissner &
Brozck, 1996; Foissner & Dragesco, 1996; Foissr.rer & Krer,rtz, 1996:Petz & Foissner,

Bullctin of Zoological Nomenclature 59(3) Scpternber 2002 161
1996). However, it is a practice that several specialists have since lollowed (Agatha &
Riedel-Lorj6, 1998; Petz et al., 1995; Song et al., 2001).
Neotypification is especially uselul when:
(1) no type material is available (holotype specimen and hapantotypes; see Article
73.3), but identification of the taxon is comparatively straightlorward,
(2) type material is available, but too poorly preserved for the diagnostic
features to be recognizable. This situation may need to be relerred to the
Comrnission;
(3) the original description is so incomplete and/or based on so few specimens that
any identification becomes a matter of arbitrary judgement. Alternatively, such
descriptions could be considered as referring to species indeterminate. How-
ever, this would greatly increase the number of scientific names because many
originai descriptions of ciliates are very incomplete. We prefer, where possible,
to identily our taxa in relation to previously described species, and to redefine
these species by detailed redescriptions. We ensure that the redescription is
based on material which shares at least one main distinctive leature ol the
original material;
(4) it has been argued that the species has one or more subjective synonyms. This
indicates that the taxon has a questionable identity in the literature and, in the
absence of type materiai, creates a 'classical' justification for neotypification,
(5) there are several similar species whose identity wili be fully differentiated by
neotypification;
(6) there are cornpeting redescriptions for a taxon.
Article 75 of the Code
Most olthe neotypes that my group has designated are in accordar-rce with Article
75 of the Code. However, as protists lorm restirrg cysts, have a wide geograpl-rical
distribution, and olten lack any type material (Corliss, 1993), it is sometimes difficult
to designate neotypes that lully satisly Article 75. L-r some cases our ciliate neotype
designations do not comply with Article 75.3.6 as they were not collected from or
near the type locality. As such, thcse and similar neotypifications could be considered
to be invalid. However, we do not consider Article 75.3.6 to be relevant to protist
neorypes lol the following reasons:
(1) most ciliates and protists are cosmopolitan, at lerist at the morphospecies level
(Finlay et al., 1996; Foissner, 1999a). In addition, many are syn'rbionts,
commensals, or parasites ol metazoan animals that often have a n-ruch widcr
biogeographical distribution than the narrow dehnition of 'type locality'
implies;
(2) the existing uncertainties can be overcome only by making types r-rniversally
available to protozoologists. The improvemellts in protist taxonomy that
neotypification produces fär outweigh the possible danger ol misidentilled
ne otypes that czrn occur lrom specimens selected out ol original typc
locality;
(3) as there are only a lew alpha-taxor.romists working with ciliates, it is
difficLrlt for them to obtain neotype material lrom or near the type locality.
The application of Article 75.3.6 could prcvent neotypes lronr evcr bcing
designated;

t6E Bulletin ol' Zoological Nomcnclature 59(3) Septcmber 2002
(4) the likelihood of re-discovering ciliates and other protists at a certain locality
is not guaranteed because the organisms may be in a dormant (cystic) stage lor
most of their life and laboratory cultivation is often unsuccessful.
Conclusion
To sum up, I suggest that neotypes ol protists, especially ciliates, should be freed
lrom the type locality regulation of Article 15.3.6 of the Code, provided that
neotypiflcation is based on a thorough redescription of the organism and usable
neotype material has been deposited in an acknowledged repository. In addition,
existing neotypes that have already been designated lrom other than original type
localities should be validated by the Comrnission.
Acknowledgements
I thank David Patterson (Australia), Michael Dolan, John Corliss, Neil Evenhuis
(U.S.A.) and Andrew Wakeham-Dawson (Commission Secretariat, London) for
helpful comments on an earlier dralt of this paper.
References
Aescht, E. 1994. Die Erlorschung der Urtiere (Protozoen) in Österreich. Kataloga de.s
Oberö.vterreichischen Lande.stnuseunts, Naue F-olge, 7l: 1'79.
Agatha, S. & Riedel-Lorj6, J.C. 1998. Morphology, inflraciliature, and ecology ol some
strobilidiine ciliates (Ciliophora, Oügotricl'rea) from coastal brackish water basins ol
Germany. Europeun Journol of Prati.ttologl'. 34: 10 17.
Berger, H. 1999. Monogruph o.f the O-t))tri('hidue (Ciliophoru, Hypotrichiu).1080 pp. Klur.ver.
Dordrecht, Boston, London.
Cole, L. 1994. Catalog ol type specimens in the international protozoan type collection.
I
Sntitltsoniat Contributions to Zttoktgt,,56l: 28.
Corliss, J.O. 1912. Current status of the international colleclion of ciliate type-specimens and
guidelines lor hrture contributors. Trtur.yuttions o.f tlte Atneric'crn Mict ostopitrtl Societr,9l
221 )_35.
Corliss, J.O. 1993. Should there be a separate code of nomenclature for the protists')
|
BfuSy.stent.t,28: 14.
Finlay,8.J., Corliss, J.O., Esteban, G. & Fenchel, T. 1996. Biodiversity at the microbial level:
the number of lree-living ciliates in the biosphere. Quurtcrll, Rat,iatr o.f' Birtlot.t,. 7l'
22t 231.
Foissner, W. 1991. Basic light and scanning electron nricroscopic mcthods for taxortomic
studies of ciliated protozoa. Europctttt Jottrnul o.f Protis'lologl',27: 3ll 330.
Foissner, W. 1997. Faunistic and laxonomic studies on ciliates (Protozoa, Ciiliophora) fronr
clean rivcrs in Bavaria (Germany), with descriptions of new species and ecological I'rotes.
Linrrrologicu, 27. 119 238.
Foissner, W. 1999a. Protist diversity: estin-ratcs ol' the near-imponderable. Prr.rrr.it, 150:
363 368.
Foissner, W. 1999b. Notes on the soil ciliate biota (Protozoa, Ciliophora) lrorn the Shimba
Hills in Kenya (Africa): diversity and description oltl.rree new genera and ten ncw species.
Biodivcr.rity und Conservaliort, 8: 319 189
Foissner, W., Agatha, S. & Berger, H.2002. Soil ciliates (Protozoa, Ciliophora) from Namibia
(Southwest Alrica), with emphasis on two contrasting cnvironments, the Etosha regiort
arrd the Namib Desert. Deni.viu (Lin-).5: I 1490.
Foissner, !V. & Brozek, S. 1996. Taxonomic characterization of Psezrrlrthuplotuulu.s irtfiu-
t,rrct«tltttus nov. spec. and Vrtrtit'clltt cltlorallutu Stillcr 1940, epiplanktonic periLricits
(Ciliophora. Poritrichia) attachecl to coerrobia ol' Anultucnu (Cyanophyta), including a

2002
Bulletin of Zoological Nornenclature 59(3) Septenrbcr 169
redescription of V. chbro.stignta (Ehrenberg, l83l). Internutk;nula Rame der gesontten
Hydrobiologic, 8l: 329-351.
Foissner, W. & Dragesco, J. 1996. Updating the trachelocercids (Ciliophora, Karyorelictea).
III. Redefinition of the genera Truchelocertu Ehrenberg and Tracheloroplti.s Dragesco,
an«J evolution in trachelocercid ciliates. Archiv/ür Protistenkurule, 147:43 9l .
Foissner' w' & Kreutz' M' 1996' Redescription ol Platyophrvu spltugtti (Penard 1922) Foissner
I 993 (Protozoa, Ciliophora). Lin:er bioIogische Beit rüge, 28: 7 45-7 56.
Foissner, W. & Pfister, G: 1997. Taxonomic and ecologic revision ol urotrichs (Ciliophora,
Prostomatida) with three or more caudal cilia, including a user-friendly key. Limnologica,
27: 3ll-347.
Medioli, F.S. & Scott, D.B. 1985. Designation ol rypes, lor one genus and nine species ol
arcellaceans (thecamoebians), with additional original relerence material lor lour other
species. Journal of Foraminiferal Re.search, 15 24-37.
Petz, iV. & Foissner, W. 1996. Morphology and morphogenesis of Lrarr tost),lo edaphoni Berger
and Foissner and Onyclndrontop.sisfiexilrs Stokes, two hypotrichs (Protozoa: Ciliophora)
from Antarctic soils. Acta Protozoologica,35 257 280-
Petz, W., Song, W. & Wilbert, N. 1995. Taxonomy and ecology of the ciliate launa (Protozoa,
Ciliophora) in the endopagial and pelagiat olthe Weddell Sea, Antarctica. Stapfo (Lin:),
40: I 223.
Song, W., Petz, W. & Warren, A. 2001. Morphology and morphogenesis ol the poorly-known
marine urostytid ciliate, Metaurostylopsis marina (Kahl, 1932) nov. gen., nov. comb.
(Protozoa, Ciliophora, Hypotrichida). European Journal of Pro t is tol ogy, 37 : 63-7 6.
Commenrs on this article are invited lor publication (subject to editing) in the Bulletin; they
shoul<i be sent to the Executive Secretary, I.C.Z.N., c/o The Natural History Museum,
Cromwell Road. London SW7 5BD, U.K. (e-mail: iczn@nhm.ac.uk).
\
\
Figs. I .3. T'wq ol'several ciliate spccies neotypificd in Foissner et al. (2002). l, 2: Ventral views of Metopus
grD.-bri,i Kahl. 1927 in vivo and at'ter protargoI silver impregnation. This species was errot.tcously
synonynrizccl will'r M. .striutu.r McMurrich, 1884 in a recent rovision. l: Silver nitrate impregnatecl specimen
it' ptitrl,,pttr.ridt,.s lutu.: (Kahl. 1930). a specie s with a complicatetl taxononric history settled by
neotypilica t ion.

