Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16
DOI10.1186/s12915-015-0125-5
RESEARCH ARTICLE Open Access
Testing ecological theories with sequence
similarity networks: marine ciliates exhibit
similar geographic dispersal patterns as
multicellular organisms
Dominik Forster1, Lucie Bittner1,2,3, Slim Karkar3,4, Micah Dunthorn1, Sarah Romac5,6, Stéphane Audic5,6,
Philippe Lopez3,4, Thorsten Stoeck1*† and Eric Bapteste3,4†
Abstract
Background: High-throughput sequencing technologies are lifting major limitations to molecular-based ecological
studies ofeukaryoticmicrobialdiversity,but analyses of theresulting millions of short sequences remain a major
bottleneck for theseapproaches.Here, weintroduce theanalyticaland statistical framework of sequence similarity
networks, increasingly used inevolutionary studies and graph theory, intothe fieldof ecology to analyze novel
pyrosequenced V4 small subunit rDNA (SSU-rDNA) sequence data setsin thecontext of previous studies, including
SSU-rDNA Sanger sequencedata from cultured ciliates and from previous environmental diversity inventories.
Results: Our broadly applicable protocol quantified theprogress inthe description of genetic diversity of ciliates by
environmental SSU-rDNA surveys, detected a fundamental historical bias in thetendency to recover already known
groupsinthesesurveys,andrevealedsubstantialamountsofhiddenmicrobialdiversity.Moreover,networkmeasures
demonstratedthatciliatesarenotgloballydispersed,butarestructuredbyhabitatandgeographicallocationat
intermediategeographicalscale,asobservedforbacteria,plants,andanimals.
Conclusions:Currentlyavailable‘universal’primersusedforlocalin-depthsequencingsurveysprovidelittlehopeto
exhaustthesignificantlyhigherciliate(andmostlikelymicrobial)diversitythanpreviouslythought.Networkanalyses
suchaspresentedinthisstudyofferapromisingwaytoguidethedesignofnovelprimersandtofurtherexplorethis
vastandstructuredmicrobialdiversity.
Keywords:Biogeography,Microbialdiversity,High-throughputsequencing,EnvironmentalrDNAsequencing,Protist
Background were debated to explain the distribution of these organ-
Evaluating the patterns and processes of microbial diver- isms. These perspectives have previously been difficult
sity is central for understanding the ecology and evolu- to evaluate for microbial eukaryotes because extensive
tion of life on Earth [1-3]. Currently, morphological and diversity underlies many morphospecies and most species
molecular methods have prompted a number of alterna- are recalcitrant to cultivation [12,13]. Traditional morpho-
tive perspectives on these issues. The extent of global logicalandmolecularmethodshavealsoimposedtemporal
dispersal versus levels of local endemism for microbial and financial limits on collecting data on total diversity
taxa [4-7], as well as the respective impacts of historical withinandamongcommunities[14,15].
barriers to dispersal versus that of current conditions The recent introduction of high-throughput sequen-
selecting among species in specific environments [8-11] cing (HTS) methodologies provided a way to push these
limits to eukaryotic microbial diversity research [16-21].
*Correspondence:stoeck@rhrk.uni-kl.de It is now possible to quickly obtain hundreds of millions
†Equalcontributors
1DepartmentofEcology,UniversityofKaiserslautern,Erwin-Schrödinger-Straße of sequences. However, the development of HTS was
14,KaiserslauternD-67633,Germany one of those events in which a nascent technology
Fulllistofauthorinformationisavailableattheendofthearticle
©2015Forsteretal.;licenseeBioMedCentral.ThisisanOpenAccessarticledistributedunderthetermsoftheCreative
CommonsAttributionLicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0),whichpermitsunrestricteduse,distribution,and
reproductioninanymedium,providedtheoriginalworkisproperlycredited.TheCreativeCommonsPublicDomain
Dedicationwaiver(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)appliestothedatamadeavailableinthisarticle,
unlessotherwisestated.

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page2of16
rapidly progressed far beyond our ability to best collect Community clustering and Louvain community ana-
and analyze the data. Thissituation encouraged develop- lyses [46] can be used to identify groups of similar se-
ments to justify which DNA region should be targeted quences at various thresholds of sequence similarity.
for sequencing and which primer-pairs should be used, Assortativity analyses [47] can be used to define sets of
for example, in foraminifera [22], ciliates [17,23-25], di- sequences with distinctive characteristics. Path analyses
noflagellates [26], fungi [27], bacteria [28] and archaea [31] can be used to quantify divergence between se-
[29]. There has also been little effort put into effectively quences. All these measures offer an original path from
exploiting the resulting millions of short HTS sequences graph theory to empirical analyses of the patterns and
in a statistical framework, especially when placed into processesshapingmicrobialdiversity.
the context of previous studies. Computational steps are In this study, we analyzed a network of 85,482 DNA
still a major bottleneck in molecular-based environmen- and cDNA ciliate pyrosequences from the V4 region of
talstudies.Theseshortcomingshavehamperedtheiden- the SSU-rDNA locus collected at eight European coastal
tification of novel taxa, of distribution patterns, and sites from three different habitats (sediments, deep
theirbiologicalandecologicalcauses. chlorophyll maximum (DCM), subsurface; for sampling
Sequence similarity network analyses, based on se- details see [18,48]). We developed a protocol to: 1) de-
quence similarity [30-35] offer an extension to sequence tect novel diversity in our new data in the context of
clustering analyses. They should not be conflated with existing sequence data from previous environmental
co-occurrence networks [36,37]. Beyond a first step of diversityinventories(Additionalfile1,TableS1)andcul-
clustering, sequence similarity networks allow biologists tured species; and 2)testecological theories about ciliate
to perform fine-grained analyses of similarities between dispersal at multiple evolutionary levels (from conspe-
sequences, because they exploit the information pro- cific to more inclusive taxonomical units). We conclude
vided by the topology of weighted connections between that ciliates in European coastal areas—just like bacteria,
sequences within and between clusters. Such networks plants and animals—are under strong environmental
rely on methods from graph theory that have recently and geographical selection at intermediate geographical
been adapted to address an increasing number of scale,andagreewithpreviousobservationsrejectingglo-
biological questions using large molecular datasets bal dispersal hypotheses [49-53]. We argue that such a
[30,31,38-43]. With such analyses, combining massive se- diversity structure calls for specific improved sampling
quence data produced from numerous studies becomes strategiesinfuturemicrobialcommunity surveys.
feasible, and diversity patterns can be inferred that other-
wisewouldnotbeapparentfromindividualstudiesalone. Results and discussion
For example, a count of phylotypes in two separate data- Thelargescopeofnetworkanalyses
sets provides no information about which of these phylo- Sequence similarity networks are inclusive graphs, easily
typesarethesame,whilesequencesfromdifferentstudies accommodating substantial molecular datasets (typically
canbedirectlycomparedinasinglenetworkanalysis. millions of sequences, but billions are possible). They
Phylogenetic analysis of short read data has made provide a unified comparative framework for these se-
great strides in recent years, following the development quences, which can be analyzed with the methods and
of phylogenetic placement algorithms for incorporating tools of graph theory [54]. In such graphs, the nodes
short read data into a reference phylogeny (for example, represent the objects to be compared (here ciliate V4
[44,45]).Yet,multiplealignmentsandtreereconstructions sequences), each pair being linked by an edge if there is
with hundreds of thousands to millions of environmental significant similarity between the two corresponding
sequences from HTS are either slow (when accurate) or nodes (herea minimum % identity(%ID),E-value,length,
inaccurate (when fast) [44]. Furthermore, a challenge andalignmentcoverspanningoverthetwosequences).
in such tools still consists in developing appropriate The resulting networks provide multiple lines of evi-
visualization tools and metrics for analyzing distributions dence to analyze genetic diversity in large molecular
of reads on computed trees [44]. The network approach datasets at various sequence similarity levels, hence at
offers a powerful alternative in terms of comparative and various taxonomicallevels,andconsequently to testeco-
visualizationstrategies(Figure1),withthebenefitofintro- logical theories (Table 1). First, thresholded sequence
ducingseveralinformativegraph-based estimates describ- similarity networks effectively provide a first structure of
ingtherelationshipsbetweensequences(Table1),thereby the data by partitioning it, since the continuity and dis-
offeringindependent waysofanalyzing the distributionof continuity of resemblances between sequences generally
microbial organisms. In other words, sequence similarity produces distinct subgraphs, called connected compo-
networks allow the empirical testing of aspects of the nents(Figure1A).Whennumerous sequencesare highly
theoretical framework of microbial ecology through similar,asisthecaseforV4sequences,connectedcompo-
the exploitation of network-based properties (Table 1). nents grow to a very large size, forming Giant Connected

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page3of16
1. BLAST comparison
A Two connected components at threshold 97%
4
2
Weighted edge list 1 3 5
7
1-2: 97% 6
8
1-6: 99% 9
2-6: 97%
2-3: 97% B One giant connected component at threshold 96%
3-4: 97%
4
3-5: 97% 2
1
4-5: 96% 3 5
2. Network construction 7
7-1: 96%
6
7-6: 96% 8
9
7-8: 97%
7-9: 99%
C Two Louvain Communities at threshold
8-9: 97%
9-1: 96% 4
9-6: 96% 2
1
3 5
7
6
8
9
Figure1Mocksequencesimilaritynetworks.Weightedsequencesimilaritynetworksdisplayingsequencesasnodes(blacknodesrepresent
environmentalsequences,rednodesrepresentsequencesofculturedciliates),connectedbyedgesreflectingtheir%IDobtainedfromaBLAST
analysis(seelistofweightededgesinwhichthecolorcodereflectsthe%ID;redfor99%,orangefor97%,pinkfor96%).Thecorrespondingcolor
codeisusedonthenetworks(rightpanel)toexploreandstructurethedata.Themockdatasetresultsin:A)twoconnectedcomponentswhen
theminimum%IDrequiredtoconnecttwonodesis≥97%;B)asinglegiantcomponentwhentheminimum%IDrequiredtoconnecttwo
nodesis≥96%;C)finer-levelstructurewithincomponentscanbefurtherdetectedusingmethodsofcommunityclustering,suchastheLouvain
Communities(seeMethods).%ID,%identity.
Table1Networkmethodsandtheiradaptationtobiologicalquestions
Networkterm Termdescription Biologicalmeaninginthiswork
Node Singleunitofagraph AV4sequence
Edge Connectionbetweentwonodes SequencesimilaritybetweentwoV4sequences
Assortativity Measureofthepreferentialconnection Evaluationofsimilarityofasetofsequencesfromthe
betweenasetofnodesofinterest samehabitatorlocation(forexample,ifsequences
fromonehabitataremoresimilartooneanotherthan
theyaresimilartosequencesfromotherhabitats,their
assortativitywillbehigh.Environmentswithdistinctive
similarV4willhavesuchahighassortativity).SeeFigure2C.
Closeness Measureofthecentrality/peripheralityofa Measureofsequencedivergencerelativetotherestof
nodeinanetwork thedataset(forexample,divergentsequences(with
respecttotherestofthedataset)havealowcloseness
andtendtobemoreperipheralastheyshareless
similaritytoothersequences).SeeFigure2D.
Shortestpath Shortestdistancebetweenapairofnodes Measuretoquantifythedivergencebetweenapairof
sequences(forexample,alongshortestpathbetween
anenvironmentalsequenceandasequencefroma
culturedciliateindicatesahighdivergencebetween
thesesequences,sincethesesequencesarenotdirect
neighborsinthegraph).SeeFigure2D.
Listedarethemostimportantnetworktermsintroducedintomicrobialecologyintheframeworkofthisstudy.Thetableindicateshowthesemethodscanbe
appliedtoHTSdatatoaddressfundamentalquestionsonthediversityanddistributionofmicrobialorganisms.HTS,high-throughputsequencing.

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page4of16
Components [55] (GCC, Figure 1B). Second, connected could be considered as divergent with a distance=2 for
components can be further partitionedto identifydensely thatthreshold).
connectedregionswithinthem,knownascommunitiesin In short, sequence similarity networks offer a global
graph theory. In each community, nodes are more con- and inclusive framework, that allows displaying and
nected to other nodes within the given community than comparing novel data with pre-existing samples and,
to external nodes (Figure 1C). We used Louvain commu- therefore, to progress towards integrated comparative
nities [46] (LCs) of level 1 as the finer level of sequence analyses of multiple data sets. Using these tools, we ana-
similarity, that is, as the tightest clusters of similar lyzed (1) how environmental SSU-rDNA projects have
sequences.Wetestedwhetherthesetwomethodsofgraph expanded our former knowledge of genetic diversity that
partitioning (CC and LC implementation, respectively) was based on cultured ciliates, (2) how the results of dif-
returned groups of sequences from similar locations, ferent environmental SSU-rDNA surveys of microbial
depths, or lab cultures, or whether no such geographical, eukaryotic diversity compare in terms of genetic diver-
habitat or ‘cultivability’structure was observed in the net- sity, while (3) enhancing our understanding of the actual
work. To do this, nodes in sequence similarity networks global diversityofciliates andofitsecologicalstructure.
were labelled based on sequence properties. Preferential
patterns of connections can then be analyzed in these la- Extensivenoveldiversityofenvironmentalciliates
belledgraphs,usingassortativityestimatesthatquantifyto Previous environmental diversity studies [19,21,57,58]
what extent sequences with the same label (for example, have shown that it is specifically the large proportion of
from a given depth or location) connect with each other low-abundance taxa in a microbial consortium, in which
rather than with differently labelled sequences [47]. For we find most of the novel diversity. Figure 3 shows the
instance,geographicalstructuringofthedataproduces(1) GCC of the DNA and of the cDNA networks con-
CCs/LCs with sequences from only one sampling site structed at the most inclusive threshold of ≥85% similar-
(Figure2Aand C), and (2) CCs/LCs withsequences from ity. Densely connected regions (LCs of the GCC) of
multiple sampling sites, yet with detectable patterns of similar sequences are replaced by supernodes for display
preferential connections between sequences from the purposes. These supernodes are colored based on the
same geographical location, if sequences from the same percentage of sequences they comprise either from cul-
sampling site are more similar to one another than they tured organisms (t-2), from cultured and environmental
aretosequencesfromothersites(Figure2AandC). sequences obtained before the BioMarKs project [48] by
A useful property of thresholded networks is that all Sanger sequencing (t-1), or that were obtained by the
sequences are not necessarily directly connected to- BioMarKs project [48] (t) using 454 pyrosequencing. In
gether within a CC or a LC. For instance, sequence 1 other words, Figure 3 reveals the similarity relationships
can be linked to sequence 2, itself linked to sequence 3, between sequences from cultured organisms and from
while sequences 1 and 3 are not directly connected anincreasingnumberofenvironmental projects.
because they do not share a greater similarity than the Ciliate sequences obtained by BioMarKs (represented
stringency threshold used to construct the network. In by all non-pink LCs in the right graph, Figure 3 (t)) sub-
that particular case, the connected component (1, 2, 3) stantially increase the diversity that was known from
is a chain (Figure 1A). In practice, CCs (and to a lesser sequences of described organisms (represented by all
extent LCs) display a variety of mathematical and topo- non-green LCs in the left graph, Figure 3 (t-2)). For
logical properties, ranging from chains to cliques (when cDNA sequences, the number of LCs increases 1.4 fold
all nodes are directly connected to one another), which and for DNA 2.3 fold. When all ciliate sequences from
can beexploitedincomparativeanalyses. the environmental reference database are also consid-
Third, detailed analyses of the relationships between ered in the GCC network analyses, we find that a large
nodes provide additional network-based estimates of proportion ofBioMarKsdiversitywas,infact,discovered
genetic diversity. In particular, the closeness of a node, previously in environmental molecular diversity surveys
quantifying its location in the graph, and the number of (non-pink nodes in Figure 3 (t) and non-green nodes in
edges separating two given nodes can be computed [56] Figure 3 (t-1), respectively). The colors of these GCCs
to compare the centrality of environmental sequences show that environmental projects conducted before
with that of sequences from cultured ciliates, and to BioMarKs mostly detected ciliates sequences that were
measure their relative dissimilarity, when environmental either from the same LCs as sequences from cultured
sequences are located more than one edge apart from organisms, or from previously untapped LCs neighbor-
any sequence from cultured ciliates (that is, if sequence ing these communities. This observation means that ra-
1 in the chain described above was a sequence from an ther central LCs with sequences from cultured ciliates
organism in culture and sequence 3 was a sequence were further enriched with environmental representa-
from an environmental sample; these two sequences tives (yellowish communities in the left graph turning

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page5of16
0% 100%
A B
C
D
Node exhibiting high closeness
Node exhibiting low closeness
Shortest path between highlighted nodes
Figure2Mocksequencesimilaritynetworksdisplayingendemismandcosmopolitandistributionofciliates.A)Schematicpatternofa
GCCcoloredtoreflecttheoriginofsequencesincaseofendemism.EachsupernodecorrespondstoaLCconsistingofagroupofsequences.
ExemplaryLCcompositionisdescribedintheinsetsinsquaredboxes.Eachnodecolorintheseinsetscorrespondstoagivenhypothetical
samplingdepth(thatis,redfordepthA,greenfordepthB).Eachsupernodecolorrepresentstheproportionofsequencesfromdifferent
samplingdepthsinaLC(seecolorbarrangingfromgreen(100%sequencesofdepthB)tored(100%sequencesofdepthA).B)Schematic
patternofthesameGCCcoloredtoreflecttheoriginofthesequencesincaseofacosmopolitandistributionofciliates.Samecolorcodeas
above.IntermediatecolorsofmostLCsreflectthefactthathighlysimilarsequencesweredetectedatdifferentdepths.C)Schematicpatternof
CCs,theirnodecolorsreflectingtheoriginofthesequences.Asabove,eachcolorcorrespondstoagivensamplingdepth.Somestructureis
visiblewheneitherallsimilarsequencesoriginatefromthesamedepth(left),orwhensequencesfromaparticulardepthclustertogetherwithin
thecomponent(middle).Incaseofawidespreaddispersalacrosssamplingdepths,nostructurewithregardtothecolorcodecanbeobserved
(right).D)SchematicpatternofaCC,describingclosenessandshortestpath.Twodistinctnodesarehighlighted.Oneinthecenter(grey)and
oneintheperiphery(lilac)oftheCC,exhibitinghighandlowcloseness,respectively.Rededgesconnectingthehighlightednodesdisplaythe
shortestpathbetweenthesetwoparticularnodes.SeeTable1forfurtherexplanations.CCs,connectedcommunities;GCC,giantconnected
components;LC,Louvaincommunities.
more orange in the middle graph), and at the same time (yellowish and orange communities of the middle graph
novel communities were discovered during these early turning lightblue in the right graph), and detecting novel
environmental projects (green communities that were communities (green in the middle graph, dark blue in
lacking any cultured member in the left graph turning the right graph) especiallyat theperiphery of the graph.
yellowishinthe middlegraph). Figure 4 gives a more precise overview of the novel
The inclusion of environmental sequences from ciliate diversity revealed by the sequence similarity
BioMarKs continued this expansion in the description networks at the ≥85% threshold. Our BioMarKs data
of genetic diversity in ciliates, identifying more environ- addedeightdistinctandpreviouslyunknownLCstothe
mental representatives of previously known communities cDNAdatasetandtwelvetotheDNAdataset(Figure4).

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page6of16
10 10
100 100
1000 0 % 100 % 1000 0 % 100 %
Sequences of cultured ciliates Sequences of cultured ciliates and BioMarKs ciliate sequences
of previous environmental ciliate studies
Time
t -2 t -1 t
DNA
cDNA
Figure3Sequencesimilaritynetworkshowingthegiantconnectedcomponent(GCC)ofeachdataset.GCCwereconstructedatthemost
inclusivesequencesimilaritythreshold(≥85%)forDNA(above)andcDNA(below)networks.SupernodesoftheGCCrepresentLouvaincommunities
(LCs);thesizeofthesupernodeindicatesthenumberofsequencesintherespectiveLC,thecolorindicatestheproportionoftargetedsequencesin
therespectiveLC(forexample,sequencesfromculturedciliatesatt-2,sequencesfromculturedciliatesandpreviousenvironmentalsamplingsatt-1,
sequencesfromBioMarKsatt).Thefigureshouldbereadalongthetimeofdatagenerationaxisfromlefttorighttofollowthegradualdiscoveryof
ciliatesbySangersequencing(t-2)comparedtopreviousenvironmentalstudies(t-1)andfinallytothecurrent454pyrosequencingstudy(t).Colorof
nodesattimet-2indicatestheproportionofsequencesfromculturedciliatesineachLC;colorofnodesattimet-1indicatestheproportionof
sequencesfromeitherculturedciliatesorformerenvironmentalciliatesstudiesineachLC;colorofnodesattimetindicatestheproportionofBioMarKs
454sequencesineachLC(differentcolorcodewasusedforreasonsofvisualization).GCC,giantconnectedcomponents;LC,Louvaincommunities.
The composition of these LCs does not imply the pres- are highly similar to such sequences (16.6% DNA and
ence of a specific hotspot for the detection of novel 10.5% cDNA sequences at distance=1, thus directly con-
ciliate diversity with regard to location or habitat nected to a cultured ciliate sequence in the CCs at ≥97%
(Figure 4). Although most of the LCs could be assigned similarity, see Additional file 3: Figure S2) but also to (2)
to the class Spirotrichea, the low sequence similarities to novelsequences,expandingtheknowngeneticdiversityof
theclosestculturedreferencesindicatethatthetaxonomic ciliates (83.4% DNA and 89.5% cDNA sequences at dis-
assignmentshouldbetakenwithcare. tances >1, thus indirectly connected to cultured ciliates
Moreover, the structure of the sequence similarity sequences in the CCs at ≥97% similarity, see Additional
networks also enabled us to quantify and characterize file3:FigureS2). Thesenovel sequencesonly share direct
the novel diversity detected by CC analyses. At all connections to other environmental sequences, and are
similarity thresholds, we detected components that ex- observedevenatveryinclusivestringencythresholds(60%
clusively consisted of BioMarKs sequences (Additional DNA sequences and 58% cDNA sequences at ≥85%
file 2: Figure S1). For example, at 97% sequence similar- similarity,seeAdditionalfile3:FigureS2).Hence,many
ity, a suggested approximation to discriminate ciliate spe- environmental sequences cannot be directly assigned to
cies based on the V4 fragment [24], 60% of the cDNA formerly described lineages. Results are similar for LCs
componentsand45%oftheDNAcomponentsdidnotin- (Additionalfile4:FigureS3).
cludeanyreferencesequence,thusrepresentingpreviously Likewise, the analysis of closeness values, contrasting
unknownciliatediversity. the centrality of environmental sequences with that of
The divergence between environmental sequences and sequences from cultured ciliates, provides similar con-
sequences from cultured ciliates was further analyzed by clusions. The centrality of a sequence reflects its similar-
network path analyses (Table 1) of CC and LC. These ity to all other sequences in the graph. The more central
analyses also provided evidence that environmental se- onesequenceis,thehigheritsclosenessandtheleastdi-
quences correspond to (1) already known sequences or vergent it is with respect to all other sequences in the

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page7of16
Figure4Noveldiversityidentifiedbysequencesimilaritynetworks.NoveldiversityinthedatasetwasdefinedaseveryLouvainCommunity
atthe85%similaritythresholdwhichexclusivelyconsistedofBioMarKssequencesandwhichsequenceswereonaveragelessthan95%identical
toanyreferencesequenceoftheculturedciliatedatabase.ThefirsteightcolumnsdisplaythecompositionoftherespectiveLCwithregardto
samplingsitesandhabitats.Thecolorsofthecirclesindicateinwhichhabitatthesequenceshadbeendetected.Bluerepresentssubsurface,
greenrepresentsDCMandorangerepresentssedimentsamples.Multicoloredcircleswerefoundinmorethanonehabitatatthesamesampling
site.Taxonomyisdisplayedtothespeciesleveloftheclosestculturedreferenceifpossible.Whenevermorethanoneclosestreferencewas
assignedtotheLC,thelastcommontaxonomiclevel(atleastclasslevel)isgiven.AllV4sequencesincorporatedintothelistedLCsarepublicly
availableatFigshare[59];separatefastafileshavebeendepositedforDNA[60]andcDNAdata[61].DCMdeepchlorophyllmaximum;LC,
Louvaincommunity.
network. Environmental sequences, which are more corresponds to increasing evolutionary distance between
divergent to sequences from organisms known from cul- ciliates. The only exception concerns CCs at the ≥90%
tures, occupy the periphery of the graph. In all networks similarity threshold, in which no significant differences
and subgraphs, sequences from cultured ciliates are between the closeness of sequences from cultured ciliates
more centrally located than sequences from environ- and from environmental studies before BioMarKs were
mental projects(Additionalfile5:TableS2andAdditional observed. Yet, when BioMarKs sequences are considered
file6:TableS3).EnvironmentalSSU-rDNAstudiesarethus in this particular analysis, the location of cultured ciliate
expanding the description of genetic diversity beyond sequences in centralpositions of CCs at ≥90% similarity
thatofknownsequencesatalltaxonomicallevels,ifone is statistically supported (P <0.01, Kolmogorov-Smirnov
assumes that decreasing similarity between sequences test with unilateral option, see Methods; Table S2). In

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page8of16
summary, all networks indices (paths, closeness, CCs given location, their sequences will tend to form clusters
andLCs)pointtothesameconclusion:networkanalysis which exclusively group sequences from that given depth
unravels novel ciliate diversity, discovered by the orlocation.Sequencesofciliateswithrestrictedgeograph-
currentsurveystrategy. ical or habitat distribution will tend to connect with each
Furthermore, our results provide an ‘historical’ per- other in our networks, and the assortativity of their
spective on the progress in diversity studies of ciliates. respective labels will be high (Figure 2A). Hence, the
On one hand, they show an inherent conservative bias proportion of connected components with significantly
of environmental SSU-rDNA surveys that rediscovered higher assortativity values than expected by chance for
‘more of what was already known’ in terms of genetic any location or depth in our graphs indicates to which
diversity. On the other hand, they show that even after extent we observed some geographical or habitat struc-
two centuries of microscopy studies and about 20 years ture in the distribution of ciliates in our data set. The
of molecular diversity analyses, HTS sequencing ap- majority of the three tested labels for habitats, and of
proachesstillrevealsubstantialamountsofnoveldiversity. the eight tested labels for locations, were significantly
Sequence similarity networks provide us with the tools to more assortative in the analyzed networks, indicating a
recognizethedegreeofthisnoveldiversity. notable geographical and habitat structure of BioMarKs
Yet, how we increase our knowledge of genetic diver- ciliatesequences(Additionalfile7:TableS4).Thestruc-
sity of environmental ciliates clearly depends on our turingeffectisespeciallyemphasizedinthecDNAdata-
background knowledge: environmental diversity surveys set fornetworksgenerated atthresholds ≥95%sequence
using primers derived from cultured organisms catch in similarity(Additionalfile7:TableS4).
first place more of the well-known described diversity Furthermore, the global dispersal hypothesis of indi-
[62], rather than detecting novel peripheral groups in vidual taxa was not supported by our data. On the con-
the networks. This suggests that the use of different sets trary, only a maximum of 2% of all CCs at the ≥99%
of primers, for example, designed from alignments of similarity threshold include sequences from all sampling
the environmental sequences in these peripheral com- sites (Figure 5). Figure 5 shows the abundance of se-
munities (Figure 4), may be an efficient opportunity to quences for each CC (results for LC were similar, see
expand further the discovery of novel, divergent groups Additional file 8: Figure S4), the number of locations in
of ciliates. More precisely, groups of sequences, such as which sequences from these clusters were found (occur-
cliques [63] or peripheral sequences can be easily ex- rence), and whether these sequences were evenly distrib-
tracted from sequence similarity networks, producing uted across the locations inwhichthey were detected, or
sets of sequences with shared similarities. These se- rather dominant at some specific location (evenness).
quences can be further aligned with each other to iden- The vast majority of all components (between 92% and
tify specific shared divergent regions, which can become 95%) is restricted to four or fewer sampling sites and is
new primers for upcoming analyses. This strategy could found at low abundance. Only a few groups of ciliates
complement the extraction of SSU-rDNA genes from were found in all samples at high abundance with an
PCR-free shotgun metagenomic datasets, and, within even distribution of sequences. This further fuels the
these less taxonomically biased datasets, ease the selec- moderate endemicity hypothesis for protists [7], which
tion of SSU-rDNA genes with sequence similarities to was also supported in previous morphospecies-based
(groupsof)divergent V4. studies [52,53,64,65] as well as in environmental gene-
based diversity inventories [49-51]. Oxygen and salinity
Geographicstructuringofciliatecommunities were identified in these and other studies as major dis-
We mapped the geographic distribution of our sequences persal barriers for protists (for example, [66]) and also
in similarity networks to test the ecological hypothesis for bacteria [67]. Indeed, oxygen-depletion may be a
that ciliates are cosmopolitan organisms. Assortativity major factor that distinguishes the water samples from
analyses were used to quantify to what extent sequences the sediment samples in our BioMarKs data set (most
fromanylocationanddepthhaveclosehomologsinmore sediments generally become anoxic within a few milli-
thanoneenvironmentalsampleofthedataset.Sincesimi- meters below the surface [68]). Likewise, salinity differ-
lar sequences are directly connected in our graphs, the ences were noteworthy among the BioMarKs sampling
largertheenvironmentaldistributionofciliateswithsimi- sites, ranging from 16.73 psu (practical salinity units) in
lar sequences, the lower the assortativity of sequences the Black Sea to 37.93 psu in the Mediterranean Sea
from a given location or from a given depth in the graph [48]. Additional possibilities are discussed elsewhere as
(since ciliates from different locations/depths with similar potential dispersal barriers for microbes; for example,
sequencesdirectlyconnectedinthegraphdisplaydifferent constraints in active and passive dispersal [11,69], and
labels, Figure 2B). By contrast, if ciliates with similar also the success rate of colonization (establishment of a
sequences preferentially occupy one given depth or one stablepopulation)inthenewenvironment[70].Thelatter

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page9of16
4000
5000
3000
ecnadnubA
4000
2000
sdaer
3000 1000
ni
ecnadnubA
2000
1.0
0.8
1000
0.6
Evenness
0.20.4
0 0.0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Occurrence
DNA
cDNA
10000
12000
8000
10000 ecnadnubA
6000
8000 4000 sdaer
2000 ni
6000
ecnadnubA
4000
1.0
2000 0.8
0.6
0.00.20.4 Evenness
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Occurrence
Figure5Three-dimensionalplotsdisplayingabundance,occurrenceandevennessofsequencesinconnectedcomponents.Plotsare
basedonDNA(above)andcDNA(below)networksatthemostexclusivesequencesimilaritythreshold(≥99%).Eachdot(339forDNA;593for
cDNA)representsoneCC,henceoneconspecificgroupofciliatesequences.Colorandpositionofadotonthey-axisindicatesitsabundance
(thenumberofsequencesintheCC).Occurrencereferstothenumberofsamplingsites(maximum=8)atwhichsequencesoftheCCwere
detected.Evenness(estimatedasSimpsonindex)describeswhethersequencesofaCCarehomogenouslydistributedacrossdifferentsampling
sites(SI=0indicatesanunevendistribution,SIcloseto1indicatesanevendistribution).LCanalysesrevealedsimilarresults(seeAdditionalfile8:
FigureS4).CC,connectedcomponents;LC,Louvaincommunities.
is influenced by a wealth of biotic and abiotic processes instance, the component with the highest abundance in
[71]. Although there may be limits to the biogeography Figure5(n=10,255)includessequencesfromonlythree
of many protists, ciliates, like bacteria [72], may have a differentsamplingsites.
common core of diversity present at very low levels, a
phenomenon that could be tested with HTS for ex- Habitatselectiononciliatepopulations
ample. Finally, while geographically widely dispersed Besides network components that are geographically re-
components include slightly more abundant sequences, strictedtooneorafewspecificsamplingsites(Figure 5),
not all abundant sequences are widely dispersed. For the effect of environmental selection is also shaping

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page10of16
ciliate community composition (Additional file 7: Table ciliates in sediments exhibit sequences that are different
S4, discussed above). The GCC of the DNA and cDNA from ciliates detected in the water column (subsurface
networksat≥85%similarityclearlyillustratethissituation, and DCM). While subsurface and DCM sequences are
in spite of their low stringency threshold (Figure 6), often found in the same clusters, only a few of these
Subsurface Subsurface
DCM DCM
Sediment Sediment
DNA cDNA
10
100
1000 0 100%
Figure6SequencesimilaritynetworkshowingtheproportionofsequencesfromeachhabitatintheGCCofDNAandcDNAdatasets.
GCCs,decomposedinLCsasinFigure3areshownforDNA(left)andforcDNA(right)networks.Networkgraphsareorganizedfromtopto
bottomtocomparetheproportionofsequencesfromsubsurfaceandDCMhabitatswiththosefromsedimenthabitats.Thecolorofnodes
(greenmeaning0%,redmeaning100%)indicatestheproportionofsequencesfromsubsurfacehabitatsineachLC(top);theproportionof
sequencesfromDCMhabitatsineachLC(middle);andtheproportionofsequencesfromsedimenthabitatsineachLC(bottom).DCM,deep
chlorophyllmaximum;GCC,giantconnectedcomponents;LC,Louvaincommunities.

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page11of16
clusters also include sediment sequences. In Figure 6 this analyses of these groups showed that they are structured
observation is highlighted by the large number of LCs with regard to habitat or geographic location. With a
which are non-green in both the top (subsurface) and broad ecological perspective, this can be interpreted as
middle (DCM) graphs, compared to the increasing num- taxonomically closely related groups (depending on the
berofgreenLCsinthebottom(sediment)graphs. resolution of sequence similarity we choose) which form
This result of contrasting sequences from sediments distinct subcommunitiesindifferenthabitatsoratdiffer-
and water column also occurs for conspecific ciliates ent geographic locations in European coastal waters. At
(defined here as groups of ciliates with ≥97% similar se- the same time, we also find highly adapted groups which
quences). Using a sequence similarity threshold of 97% are restricted to one specific habitat or one location.
for CC analyses, we found that 50% of all sediment This is similar to patterns observed in animals and
cDNA components are exclusive to this habitat, while plants[76]andconfirmsobservationsonciliatedispersal
only 4% and 9% are exclusive to the subsurface and the patterns from other oceanographic areas [49,50]. Using
DCM (Additional file 9: Figure S5). A similar trend was networkanalysesofmolecularmarkers,importanttheor-
observed in DNA components, of which 30% were ies can thus be tested: the technology for massive data
sediment-exclusive, 12% subsurface-exclusive and 7% production at an affordable price is in place, and power-
DCM-exclusive (Additional file 9: Figure S5). Habitat fulinclusivemethodsareavailable.
specialization of marine protistan species at an even As we integrated data from multiple samples into the
closer geographical proximity was also reported by Orsi same comparative context, we must also conclude that
and colleagues [50], who could relate their findings to a surveying ciliate diversity appears more as a challenge
distinct geochemicalgradient. In comparison, ourresults than ever. The restriction of most taxa to one or a few
show a less pronounced level of habitat specialization different geographic locations and habitats, supported by
along the water column, which we explain by the lack of all network estimates and for both DNA and cDNA se-
a geochemical gradient and, thus, the less exigency for quences, means that we may have to bury our hopes to
organisms to adapt. On the other hand, the high level of exhaust the ciliate (and most likely the microbial) diver-
ciliate organisms which are specialized to sediment habi- sity of an environment using available ‘universal’ primers
tats is not unexpected, because a psammophilic life style and local in-depth sequencing [62]. Network analyses of
requires different adaptations than a planktonic life style sequence data can still contribute to explore such a
[73]. In a morphology-based approach combining pub- structured vast microbial diversity. Sequence similarity
licly available ciliate data of 17 globally distributed mar- networks provide all the tools needed to detect exclu-
ine benthic sampling sites, Azovsky and Mazei [74] sively environmental clusters (CC or LC) and/or groups
could show that one quarter of the observed ciliate spe- ofsequenceswhicharedistantfrompreviouslydescribed
cies were only detected at one single sample site and diversity. Alignment of groups of novel, peripheral, en-
every second species occurred at not more than three vironmental sequences thus revealed by network ana-
different sites. Likewise, an environmental SSU-rDNA lyses can guide the design of new sets of primers which
study [75] revealed that geographical structures at the will be useful to expand our knowledge of microbial di-
sea-floor can act as biogeographical barriers and lead to versity, moving it further away from the current status
distinctive benthic microbial communities. A more frag- quo and its logical starting point: the sequences of cul-
mented distribution of locally restricted benthic ciliate tured organisms.
species, induced by geographical structures, such as the The creation of distinct primers should compensate
Strait of Gibraltar, could explain the comparably high fortheinherenttendencyofrecentenvironmentalrDNA
levelofexclusiveCCsfrom thesedimentobservedinthe surveyswhosefindingsgravitatearoundthesamegroups
current network approach. of organisms [62]. We encourage readers who want
more than ‘more of the same’ from diversity surveys,
Conclusions and to enhance the scale at which ecological theories
Networkanalysisinmicrobialbiogeography about microbial diversity can be tested, to experience
We present network analyses as highly efficient tools to thiskindofinclusive network-basedstrategy.
exploit massive HTS datasets and identify novel diver-
sity. Further, network analyses appear as a useful means Methods
to address fundamental subjects in ecology using envir- Constitutionofthedataset
onmental diversity inventories. Such subjects include the A first reference database of ciliate sequences was built
analyses of microbial distribution patterns that allow us including 308 V4 SSU-rDNA sequences from GenBank.
to draw conclusions about the underlying biological Only sequences from cultured and morphologically
causes. For instance, while closely related ciliate se- identified isolates were selected. Additionally a second
quences grouped together in our networks, the in-depth reference database of 82,560 environmental ciliate

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page12of16
SSU-rDNA sequences from earlier diversity studies in disconnected networks at various sequence similarity
was generated from GenBank. Moreover, environmen- thresholds (85%, 90%, 95%, 96%, 97%, 98%, 99%). Mean-
tal samples were collected at eight European marine ing that in a network with a sequence similarity thresh-
coastal sites as part of the biodiversity of marine eu- old of 97%, two nodes (where each node represents one
karyotes project (BioMarKs [48]). Information about sequence from the dereplicated DNA or cDNA dataset,
sampling procedure, filter preparation, extraction of respectively) are connected by an edge only if they share
nucleic acids, sequencing strategy, sequence quality a sequence similarity of at least 97% (Figure 1A). As a
checkandtaxonomicassignment(onthephylumlevel) consequence, sequence similarity networks provide a
of the samples can be found in Logares et al. (2014) first clustering, producing connected components (CCs),
[18]. Stringent cleaning options were used (exact pri- that is, sets of connected sequences isolated from the
mer matching, removing low quality score sequences restofthegraph(Figure 1A).A secondlevelofsequence
using sliding windows of 50 bp, and chimera checking) clustering was achieved using the Louvain method [46]
toguaranteethequalityandreliabilityofthefinaldata- (default parameters, first level, for example, the most
set. Each sequence was labelled based on its origin fine-grained resolution) (Figure 1C). Thismethod identi-
(cultured organism, earlier environmental project, Bio- fies densely connected nodes in a graph, and aggregates
MarKs environmental sample), depth in the water col- thesenodesinto clusters(Louvaincommunities(LCs)).
umn (subsurface, DCM, sediment), and sampling site The EGN output which served as the basis for all sub-
of the BioMarKs project [48]. In all environmental sequent network analyses in the context of our work is
datasets, only sequences which could be assigned to a publiclyavailableat Figshare [81].
culture sequence belonging to the phylum Ciliophora
and had at least 300 bp in length were considered, Graphdisplay
amounting to 85,482 BioMarKs ciliate V4 SSU-rDNA The largest connected component of the sequence simi-
sequences. Furthermore, datasets were dereplicated larity networks was found at ≥85% similarity and its LCs
(when identical, only unique sequences were kept for were displayed using Gephi [82] (Yifan Hu multilevel
each sampling site in the BioMarKs database), which layout). Each LC is represented by a supernode. Two
resulted in a final dataset of 25,842 unique BioMarKs LCs are connected to another, when there is at least one
sequences (8,931 DNA and 16,911 cDNA sequences, connection between the two sets of sequences belonging
respectively), 308 ciliate culture sequences and 928 to that pair of LC (Figures 3 and 6). The number of
ciliate sequences of earlier environmental studies (listed sequences in a LC is represented by the supernode size.
in Additional file 1: Table S1). Sequence data used in LCs were colored based on their proportion of se-
this analysis are publicly available at Figshare [59,77]. quences with a label of interest (for example, cultured or
Additionally, we deposited one table listing all Bio- environmental sequence, habitat affiliation) to display
MarKs ciliate sequences and their respective properties the structure of genetic diversity of ciliates (Figures 3
[78] and one table listing all cultured ciliate reference and6).
sequences[78].Twofastafilesthatincludeallnovelcili-
ate diversity sequences as listed in Figure 4 are also Graphanalyses
available and may be used to design novel primers Clusters exclusively comprising sequences with the same
(DNA fasta file: [60]; cDNA fasta file: [61]). For better label (for example, BioMarKs sequences or cultured cili-
understanding of the deposited data, we also provide a ate sequences) were quantified. Using Igraph library
manualonhowtonavigateinourfiles[79]. scripts [83] in the R statistical computing environment
[84], we applied two measures of dissimilarity between
Graphconstruction BioMarKs sequences, environmental sequences obtained
Two types of sequence similarity networks (Figure 1) in previous projects, and sequences from cultured cili-
were constructed in this study to compare the consili- ates. First, we used the minimal shortest path between
ence between the information within BioMarKs DNA all pairs of nodes of interest, expressed in number of
sequences on the one hand and RNA sequences on the edges (Table 1, Figure 2D); in other words, the minimal
other hand. We used (1) anetwork with BioMarKs DNA number of edges that must be crossed to connect any
plus reference sequences (10,167 sequences) and (2) a environmental node (that is, a BioMarKs sequence or a
network with BioMarKs cDNA plus reference sequences sequence from a previous environmental project) and its
(18,147 sequences). In both cases, sequences were used closest node of a cultured ciliate sequence (infinite when
as an input file for EGN [80] choosing the following op- no such path existed). Second, we used the closeness of
tions: BLASTn E-value <1e-5; minimum hit identity environmental nodes and nodes from cultured ciliates in
threshold 60%; minimum hit length 40% of the smallest our graphs (Table 1, Figure 2D). This closeness quanti-
homolog. This protocol excluded singletons and resulted fies the centrality of sequences in the graph: more

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page13of16
peripheral sequences are more different from most other value of SI ranges between 0 and an upper limit of 1-1/N
sequences of the dataset. The distributions of closeness (N being the total number of objects). A cluster of se-
values for these groups of nodes were compared using quences which is perfectly homogeneously distributed
theKolmogorov-Smirnovtest(P<0.05andP<0.01)with amongthesamplingsiteswillreachaSIcloseto1.
the unilateral option (test 1: cultured sequences versus
sequences from former environmental studies; test 2:
cultured sequences versus all environmental sequences Additional files
(former environmental studiesplus BioMarKs)).
Additionalfile1:TableS1.PubliclyavailableSSU-rDNAsequencedata
includedintotheenvironmentalreferencedatabase.Thetableshows
Testingtheglobaldispersaltheory whichstudieshadbeenincludedintotheenvironmentalreference
databaseofoursequencesimilaritynetworkapproach.Thefirstcolumn
Two distinct measures were used to test whether all
givesthenumberofV4-SSU-rDNAsequencesofeachstudywhich
groupsofciliateswithsimilarV4DNAorcDNAsequences fulfilledourrequirementsandwerethusincorporatedintothe
were found at all sampling sites. First, assortativity—a environmentalreferencedatabase.
measure for the tendency of nodes with the same label Additionalfile2:FigureS1.ProportionofCCs(above)andLCs
(below)inDNAandcDNAnetworkswhichexclusivelycontained
(orofnodeswithoutthatlabel)topreferentiallyconnect
BioMarKssequences.DNAdataareshowninred,cDNAdatainblue.
with one another in the graph—was computed for each CompositionofeachCCandLCwasanalyzedatallsequencesimilarity
label for each CC and LC. Assortativity was defined as thresholdstodetectreferencesfromculturedciliatesequencesand
sequencesofformerenvironmentalstudies.ProportionofCCsandLCs
inNewman(2003)[47],fortwocategories(nodesofthe
displayedhereonlycontainsequencesofBioMarKsproject.Themore
targeted label—for example, a given habitat—and other inclusivethethreshold(thatis,thelowerthesequencesimilarity),the
nodes). An assortativity coefficient r=0 means that fewerCCsandLCscanbedetected.Thus,theproportionofCCsandLCs
exclusivelycontainingBioMarKssequencesdecreaseswithlowersimilarity
edges between the two categories are distributed ran-
thresholds.IncomparisontoDNAnetworks,ahigherproportionof
domlybetweenthetwocategories.Apositivecoefficient exclusiveCCsandLCscanbefoundinthecDNAnetworks,exceptforthe
mostinclusivesimilaritythreshold(≥85%).
indicates that nodes of the same category (that is, same
depth or location) tend to be linked together, while a Additionalfile3:FigureS2.NetworkpathanalysesofCCs.Foreach
environmentalnodeatallsequencesimilaritythresholds,theshortest
negative one indicates that nodes of different categories
pathtoareferencenode(nodeofaculturedciliate)hasbeencalculated.
tend to be linked together. Therefore, under total en- Shortestpathanalysesdescribetheminimumnumberofedgeslinking
theinitialnodewiththetargetnode.Distanceof‘1’toareferencenode
demism, patterns as in Figure 2A are expected in a
meansthattheenvironmentalnodeisdirectlyconnectedtothe
graph. Sequences from a given depth or location cluster referencenode(culturedciliate).Distanceof‘inf’(meansinfinite)toa
preferentiallytogetherandfallwithinthesameexclusive referencenodemeansthattheenvironmentalnodeisinaCCwithout
regionofthegraph.Bycontrast,inthe caseofacosmo- anyreferencenode(culturedciliate),hencenoshortestpathcanbe
calculated.Theproportionofenvironmentalnodesforwhichapath
politan distribution of ciliates, similar sequences can be lengthof‘inf’isreported,decreaseswiththesequencesimilarity
found in all depths and locations, producing a pattern threshold.NumbersontopofeachplotindicatetheabundanceofCCs
suchasthatofFigure2B. regardingthesequencesimilaritythreshold.
Statistical significance of the assortativity values was Additionalfile4:FigureS3.NetworkpathanalysesofLCs.Foreach
environmentalnodeatallsequencesimilaritythresholds,theshortest
assessed by randomly shuffling the labels over all se-
pathtoareferencenode(nodeofaculturedciliatesequence)hasbeen
quences for each CC and LC while keeping the same calculated.ShortestpathanalysesofLCsrevealedsimilarpatternsasthe
network topology. Assortativity was computed for each shortestpathanalysesofCCs(Additionalfile3:FigureS2).
label before and after the shuffling. Distributions of ori- Additionalfile5:TableS2.Kolmogorov-Smirnov(KS)testscomparing
closenessdistributionsinDNAnetworks.Atallsequencesimilaritythresholds
ginal and randomized assortativity values were com-
andforbothCCsandLCstwoindependentKS-testswereperformed:1)to
pared with a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (P <0.05) to test testiftheclosenessofnodesofculturedciliates(C )washigherthanthe
cultured
whether observed assortativity values were significantly closenessofnodesfromformerenvironmentalstudiesbefore454sequencing
(C )and2)totestiftheclosenessofC washigherthanthe
greaterthanbychance. formerEnv cultured
closenessofallenvironmentalnodes(C :nodesfromformerenvironmental
Second, for each cluster of sequences in our ≥99% studiesplusBioMarKsnodes).ClosenessE cn av nbeunderstoodasameasurement
similarity networks, likely grouping sequences of the ofcentralityinanetwork(thatis,thehigherthecloseness,themorecentral
thenodeswillbelocated).Forallbutonecaseitcouldbeconfirmedthat
same ciliate species, we plotted the abundance of that
C wassignificantlyhigherthanC (P<0.05orP<0.01).Compared
cultured formerEnv
cluster (measured as the number of sequences), the toC ,C wasalwayssignificantlyhigher.
Env cultured
occurrence of that cluster (measured as the number of Additionalfile6:TableS3.KS-testscomparingclosenessdistributions
sampling sites at which these sequences were detected), incDNAnetworks.ResultsandpatternsoftheKS-testsonclosenessin
DNAnetworks(Additionalfile5:TableS2)areconfirmed.
andtheevennessofthatcluster,measuredbytheSimpson
" #
Additionalfile7:TableS4.KS-testcomparingthedistributionof
oXbjects
assortativityingenesimilaritynetworks.Assortativitydescribesthe
index (SI) SI ¼1− p2 i in which p i corresponds to tendencyofnodestobeconnectedtonodesofthesamelabel.Two
i¼1 independentgroupsoflabels(threehabitats,eightlocations)weretested
the proportional abundance of units (here: sequences) forDNAandcDNAnetworksateachsequencesimilaritythreshold.Using
counted in object i (here: each sampling site) [85]. The aone-sidedKS-testweanalyzedifthedistributionofassortativityvalues

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page14of16
Received:12August2014Accepted:28January2015
ofeachrespectivelabelwassignificantlygreater(P<0.05)thanexpected
bychance.Thusthenodesoftherespectivelabelweremorelikelyto
connectwitheachotherthantoconnecttonodesofanotherlabel.
Additionalfile8:FigureS4.Three-dimensionalplotsdisplaying References
abundance,occurrenceandevennessofsequencesinLCs.Plotsare 1. FalkowskiPG,FenchelT,DelongEF.ThemicrobialenginesthatdriveEarth's
basedonDNA(above)andcDNA(below)networksatthemostexclusive biogeochemicalcycles.Science.2008;320:1034–9.
sequencesimilaritythreshold(≥99%).Eachdot(370forDNA;670for 2. KellerM,ZenglerK.Tappingintomicrobialdiversity.NatRevMicrobiol.
cDNA)representsoneLC. 2004;2:141–50.
3. StaleyJT,ReysenbachAL.Biodiversityofmicrobiallife:foundationofearth's
Additionalfile9:FigureS5.CompositionofCCinDNA(above)and
biosphere.NewYork:Wiley-Liss,Inc;2001.
cDNA(below)genesimilaritynetworks.EachCCateachsimilarity
4. FinlayBJ,EstebanGF,OlmoJL,TylerPA.Globaldistributionoffree-living
thresholdwasanalyzedtohighlighttheproportionofnodes,which
microbialspecies.Ecography.1999;22:138–44.
derivedfromthethreeinvestigatedhabitatsinthisstudy(Subsurface,
5. FinlayBJ.Globaldispersaloffree-livingmicrobialeukaryotespecies.Science.
DCM,Sediment).ThegraphsshowtheproportionofallCCs,which
2002;296:1061–3.
exclusivelyconsistofnodesofthesamehabitat.Inallnetworksthe
6. FoissnerW.Biogeographyanddispersalofmicro-organisms:areview
highestproportionofexclusiveCCswasfoundforsedimenthabitats
emphasizingprotists.ActaProtozool.2006;45:111–36.
(orange),insomenetworksprovidingmorethan50%ofallCCs.The
7. FoissnerW,ChaoA,KatzLA.Diversityandgeographicdistributionofciliates
proportionofDCM(green)andsubsurface(blue)CCsneverreached
(Protista:Ciliophora).BiodiversConserv.2008;17:345–63.
morethan15.4%and16.4%,respectively,ofthetotalnumberofCCsin
8. BassD,RichardsTA,MatthaiL,MarshV,Cavalier-SmithT.DNAevidencefor
therespectivenetwork.IntheDNAnetworksanincreaseofCCsharboring
globaldispersalandprobableendemicityofprotozoa.BMCEvolBiol.
exclusivelynodesofDCMhabitatscouldbeobservedwithdecreasing
2007;7:162.
sequencesimilarity.ThereasonforthisisafewexclusiveDCMCCswhich
9. GreenJL,HolmesAJ,WestobyM,OliverI,BriscoeD,DangerfieldM,etal.
donotmergewithanyotherCCalthoughthethresholdgetsmore
Spatialscalingofmicrobialeukaryotediversity.Nature.2004;432:747–50.
inclusiveandfewerCCsintotalcanbefound.Consequently—asthe
reportedvaluesareproportions,notabsolutenumbers—moreCCscanbe 10. GreenJ,BohannanBJ.Spatialscalingofmicrobialbiodiversity.TrendsEcol
Evol.2006;21:501–7.
detectedinproportiontothetotalnumberofCCs.
11. MartinyJB,BohannanBJ,BrownJH,ColwellRK,FuhrmannJA,GreenJL,
etal.Microbialbiogeography:puttingmicroorganismsonthemap.NatRev
Microbiol.2006;4:102–12.
Competinginterests
Theauthorsdeclarethattheyhavenocompetinginterests. 12. DawsonSC,PaceNR.Novelkingdom-leveleukaryoticdiversityinanoxic
environments.ProcNatlAcadSciUSA.2002;99:8324–9.
Authors’contributions 13. StoeckT,HaywardB,TaylorGT,VarelaR,EpsteinSS.AmultiplePCR-primer
approachtoaccessthemicroeukaryoticdiversityinenvironmentalsamples.
TSandEBconceivedandguidedthestudy;DFandLBperformednetwork
Protist.2006;157:31–43.
analyses;DF,LB,TSandEBinterpretedandputdataintoscientificcontext;
14. MedingerR,NolteV,PandeyRV,JostS,OttenwälderB,SchlöttererC,etal.
MDconstructedandprovidedtheV4-database;DF,LB,SK,MD,TSandEB
Diversityinahiddenworld:potentialandlimitationofnext-generation
wrotethemanuscript;LB,MD,SRandSAperformedsampling;LB,SK,SA,PL
sequencingforsurveysofmoleculardiversityofeukaryoticmicroorganisms.
andEBperformedbioinformaticalanalyses.Allauthorsreadandapproved
MolEcol.2010;19:32–40.
thefinalmanuscript.
15. SchusterSC.Next-generationsequencingtransformstoday’sbiology.Nat
Methods.2008;5:16–8.
Authors’information
16. BittnerL,GobetA,AudicS,RomacS,EggeES,SantiniS,etal.Diversity
DominikForsterandLucieBittner:sharefirstauthorship. patternsofunculturedHaptophytesunravelledbypyrosequencingin
ThorstenStoeckandEricBapteste:shareseniorauthorship. NaplesBay.MolEcol.2013;22:87–101.
17. DunthornM,OttoJ,BergerSA,StamatakisA,MahéF,RomacS,etal.
Acknowledgements Placingenvironmentalnext-generationsequencingampliconsfrom
WethankPAJachietfortechnicalhelp.WearegratefultotheCNRS-UPMC microbialeukaryotesintoaphylogeneticcontext.MolBiolEvol.
ABiMSbioinformaticsplatform(http://abims.sb-roscoff.fr)forproviding 2014;31:993–1009.
computationalresourcesandsupport.TheBioMarKs454sequencedatawere 18. LogaresR,AudicS,BassD,BittnerL,BoutteC,ChristenR,etal.Patternsof
generatedaspartofastudysupportedbytheEU-FP7ERA-netprogram rareandabundantmarinemicrobialeukaryotes.CurrBiol.2014;24:813–21.
BiodivERsA,undertheprojectBioMarKs(2008-6530).Wethankallmembers 19. SoginML,MorrisonHG,HuberJA,WelchDM,HuseSM,NealPR,etal.
oftheBioMarKsconsortiumwhoparticipatedinfieldsamplinganddata Microbialdiversityinthedeepseaandtheunderexplored“rarebiosphere”.
generation.WealsoappreciatethesupportoftheResearchUnitBioComp ProcNatlAcadSciUSA.2006;103:12115–20.
attheUniversityofKaiserslautern,fundedbytheResearchInitiativeof 20. StoeckT,BehnkeA,ChristenR,Amaral-ZettlerL,Rodriguez-MoraMJ,
Rhineland-Palatinate.ThisworkwassupportedbyagrantfromStipendienstiftung ChistoserdovA,etal.Massivelyparalleltagsequencingrevealsthe
Rheinland-PfalztoD.F.;agrantfromUniversityofKaiserslauterntoL.B.;Deutsche complexityofanaerobicmarineprotistancommunities.BMCBiol.
Forschungsgemeinschaft(DFG,grant#DU1319/1-1)toM.D.;DFG(grants# 2009;7:72.
STO414/3-1,STO414/3-2andSTO414/11-1)toT.S.,andbyagrantfromRegion 21. StoeckT,BassD,NebelM,ChristenR,JonesMD,BreinerHW,etal.Multiple
Ile-de-France(DIMMalinf)toS.K.E.B.isfundedbytheEuropeanResearch markerparalleltagenvironmentalDNAsequencingrevealsahighly
CouncilundertheEuropeanCommunity’sSeventhFrameworkProgrammeFP7 complexeukaryoticcommunityinmarineanoxicwater.MolEcol.
(2007-2013GrantAgreementn°615274).Wegreatlyappreciatethecomments 2010;19:21–31.
ofthreeanonymousreviewersfortheirconstructivecommentsonour 22. PawlowskiJ,LecroqB.ShortrDNAbarcodesforspeciesidentificationin
manuscript. Foraminifera.JEukaryotMicrobiol.2010;57:197–205.
23. BehnkeA,EngelM,ChristenR,NebelM,KleinRR,StoeckT.Depictingmore
Authordetails accuratepicturesofprotistancommunitycomplexityusingpyrosequencing
1DepartmentofEcology,UniversityofKaiserslautern,Erwin-Schrödinger-Straße ofhypervariableSSUrRNAgeneregions.EnvMicrob.2010;13:340–9.
14,KaiserslauternD-67633,Germany.2CNRS,FR3631,InstitutdeBiologie 24. DunthornM,KlierJ,BungeJ,StoeckT.Comparingthehyper-variableV4
Paris-Seine,ParisF-75005,France.3SorbonneUniversités,UPMCUnivParis06, andV9regionsforassesmentofciliateenvironmentaldiversity.JEukaryot
InstitutdeBiologieParis-Seine(IBPS),ParisF-75005,France.4CNRS,UMR7138, Microbiol.2012;59:185–7.
InstitutdeBiologieParis-Seine,ParisF-75005,France.5CNRS,UMR7144,Station 25. MahéF,MayorJ,BungeJ,ChiJ,SiemensmayerT,StoeckT,etal.Comparing
BiologiquedeRoscoff,PlaceGeorgesTeissier,RoscoffF-29680,France. high-throughputplatformsforsequencingtheV4regionofSSU-rDNAin
6SorbonneUniversités,UPMCUnivParis06,UMR7144,StationBiologiquede environmentalmicrobialeukaryoticdiversitysurveys.JEukMicrobiol.2014;
Roscoff,PlaceGeorgesTeissier,RoscoffF-29680,France. doi:10.1111/jeu.12187.

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page15of16
26. SternRF,AndersenRA,JamesonI,KüpperFC,CoffrothMA,VaulotD,etal. 51. OrsiW,SongYC,HallamS,EdgcombV.Effectofoxygenminimumzone
Evaluatingtheribosomalinternaltranscribedspacer(ITS)asacandidate formationoncommunitiesofmarineprotists.ISMEJ.2012;6:1586–601.
dinoflagellateBarcodemarker.PLoSOne.2012;7:e42780. 52. DolanJR,LandryMR,RitchieME.Thespecies-richassemblagesoftintinnids
27. SchochCL,SeifertKA,HuhndorfS,RobertV,SpougeJL,LevesqueCA, (marineplanktonicprotists)arestructuredbymouthsize.ISMEJ.
etal.Nuclearribosomalinternaltranscribedspacer(ITS)regionasa 2013;7:1237–43.
universalDNAbarcodemarkerforFungi.ProcNatlAcadSciUSA. 53. DolanJR,PierceRW.DiversityanddistributionsofTintinnids.In:DolanJR,
2012;109:6241–6. MontagnesDJ,AgathaS,CoatsDW,StoeckerDK,editors.Thebiologyand
28. HuseSM,DethlefsenL,HuberJA,WelchDM,RelmanDA,SoginML. ecologyofTintinnidciliates:modelsformarineplankton.1sted.Hoboken:
ExploringmicrobialdiversityandtaxonomyusingSSUrRNAhypervariable Wiley-Blackwell;2013.p.214–43.
tagsequencing.PLoSGenet.2008;4:e1000255. 54. JunkerB,SchreiberF.Analysisofbiologicalnetworks.Hoboken:JohnWiley
29. BatesST,Berg-LyonsD,CaporasoJG,WaltersWA,KnightR,FiererN.Examining &Sons;2008.
theglobaldistributionofdominantarchaealpopulationsinsoil.ISMEJ. 55. ErdõsP,RényiA.Ontheevolutionofrandomgraphs.PublMathInstHung
2010;5:908–17. AcadSci.1960;5:17–61.
30. Alvarez-PonceD,LopezP,BaptesteE,McInerneyJO.Genesimilarity 56. NewmanME.Ameasureofbetweennesscentralitybasedonrandomwalks.
networksprovidetoolsforunderstandingeukaryoteoriginsandevolution. SocNetw.2005;27:39–54.
ProcNatlAcadSciUSA.2013;110:1594–603. 57. Pedrós-AlióC.Marinemicrobialdiversity:canitbedetermined.Trends
31. Bapteste E, Lopez P, Bouchard F, Baquero F, McInerney JO, Burian Microbiol.2006;14:257–63.
RM. Evolutionary analyses of non-genealogical bonds produced 58. DunthornM,StoeckT,ClampJ,WarrenA,MahéF.Ciliatesandtherare
by introgressive descent. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. biosphere:areview.JEukMicrobiol.2014;61:404–9.
2012;109:18266–72. 59. Figshare.http://figshare.com.
32. BaptesteE,BicepC,LopezP.Evolutionofgeneticdiversityusingnetworks: 60. Novelciliatediversitysequences(DNA).http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.
thehumangutmicrobiomeasacasestudy.ClinMicrobiolInfect. figshare.1266267.
2012;18:40–3. 61. Novelciliatediversitysequences(cDNA).http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.
33. BaptesteE,vanIerselL,JankeA,KelchnerS,KelkS,McInerneyJO,etal. figshare.1266266.
Networks:expandingevolutionarythinking.TrendsGenet.2013;29:439–41. 62. JeonS,BungeJ,LeslinC,StoeckT,HongS,EpsteinS.EnvironmentalrRNA
34. BittnerL,HalaryS,PayriC,CruaudC,deReviersB,LopezP,etal.Some inventoriesmissoverhalfofprotistandiversity.BMCMicrobiol.2008;8:222.
considerationsforanalyzingbiodiversityusingintegrativemetagenomics 63. MakinoK,UnoT.Newalgorithmsforenumeratingallmaximalcliques.In:
andgenenetworks.BiolDirect.2010;5:47. HagerupT,KatajainenJ,editors.Algorithmtheory-SWAT2004:8-10July
35. LynchMD,BartramAK,NeufeldJD.Targetedrecoveryofnovel 2004;Humlebæk.Berlin,Heidelberg:SpringerVerlag;2004.p.260–72.
phylogeneticdiversityfromnext-generationsequencedata.ISMEJ. 64. AgathaS.GlobaldiversityofaloricateOligotrichea(Protista,Ciliophora,
2012;6:2067–77. Spirotricha)inmarineandbrackishseawater.PLoSOne.2011;6:e22466.
36. FaustK,RaesJ.Microbialinteractions:fromnetworkstomodels.NatRev 65. DunthornM,StoeckT,WolfK,BreinerHW,FoissnerW.Diversityand
Microbiol.2012;10:538–50. endemismofciliatesinhabitingneotropicalphytotelmata.SystBiodivers.
37. ChaffronS,RehrauerH,PernthalerJ,vonMeringC.Aglobalnetworkof 2012;10:195–205.
coexistingmicrobesfromenvironmentalandwhole-genomesequence 66. ForsterD,BehnkeA,StoeckT.Meta-analysesofenvironmentalsequence
data.GenomeRes.2010;20:947–59. dataidentifyanoxiaandsalinityasparametersshapingciliatecommunities.
38. AtkinsonHJ,MorrisJH,FerrinTE,BabbittPC.Usingsequencesimilarity SystBiodivers.2012;10:277–88.
networksforvisualizationofrelationshipsacrossdiverseprotein 67. LozuponeCA,KnightR.Globalpatternsinbacterialdiversity.ProcNatlAcad
superfamilies.PLoSOne.2009;4:e4345. SciUSA.2007;104:11436–40.
39. DaganT,Artzy-RandrupY,MartinW.Modularnetworksandcumulative 68. RevsbechNP,SørensenJ,BlackburnH,LomholtJP.Distributionofoxygen
impactoflateraltransferinprokaryotegenomeevolution.ProcNatlAcad inmarinesediments,measuredwithmicroelectrodes.LimnolOceanog.
SciUSA.2008;105:10039–44. 1980;25:403–11.
40. HalaryS,LeighJW,CheaibB,LopezP,BaptesteE.Networkanalyses 69. JenkinsDG,BrescacinCR,DuxburyCV,ElliottJA,EvansJA,GrablowKR,
structuregeneticdiversityinindependentgeneticworlds.ProcNatlAcad etal.Doessizematterfordispersaldistance?GlobalEcolBiogeogr.
SciUSA.2010;107:127–32. 2007;16:415–25.
41. JachietPA,PogorelcnikR,BerryA,LopezP,BaptesteE.MosaicFinder: 70. PapkeRT,WardDM.Theimportanceofphysicalisolationtomicrobial
identificationoffusedgenefamiliesinsequencesimilaritynetworks. diversification.FEMSMicrobiolEcol.2004;48:293–303.
Bioinformatics.2013;29:837–44. 71. FiererN.Microbialbiogeography:patternsinmicrobialdiversityacross
42. MediniD,CovacciA,DonatiC.Proteinhomologynetworkfamiliesreveal spaceandtime.In:ZenglerK,editor.Accessinguncultivated
step-wisediversificationofTypeIIIandTypeIVsecretionsystems.PLoS microorganisms:fromtheenvironmenttoorganismsandgenomesand
CompBiol.2006;2:e173. back.WashingtonDC:ASMPress;2008.p.95–115.
43. SongN,JosephJM,DavisGB,DurandD.Sequencesimilaritynetwork 72. GibbonsSM,CaporasoJG,PirrungM,FieldD,KnightR,GilbertJA.Evidence
revealscommonancestryofmultidomainproteins.PLoSCompBiol. forapersistentmicrobialseedbankthroughouttheglobalocean.ProcNatl
2008;4:e1000063. AcadSciUSA.2013;110:4651–5.
44. BergerSA,KrompassD,StamatakisA.Performance,accuracyandwebserver 73. JørgensenBB,BoetiusA.Feastandfamine-microbiallifeinthedeep-sea
evolutionaryplacementofshortsequencereadsundermaximum bed.NatRevMicrobiol.2007;5:770–81.
likelihood.SystBiol.2011;60:291–302. 74. AzovskyA,MazeiY.Domicrobeshavemacroecology?Large‐scalepatterns
45. MatsenFA,KodnerRB,ArmbrustEV.pplacer:lineartimemaximum-likelihood inthediversityanddistributionofmarinebenthicciliates.GlobalEcol
andBayesianphylogeneticplacementofsequencesontoafixedreference Biogeogr.2013;22:163–72.
tree.BMCBioinformatics.2010;11:538. 75. ScheckenbachF,HausmannK,WylezichC,WeitereM,ArndtH.Large-scale
46. BlondelVD,GuillaumeJL,LambiotteR,LefebvreE.Fastunfoldingof patternsinbiodiversityofmicrobialeukaryotesfromtheabyssalseafloor.
communitiesinlargenetworks.JStatMech.2008;10:P10008. ProcNatlAcadSciUSA.2010;107:115–20.
47. NewmanME.Mixingpatternsinnetworks.PhysRevEStatNonlinSoft 76. LomolinoMV,RiddleBR,BrownJH.Biogeography.3rded.Sunderland:
MatterPhys.2003;67:026126. SinauerAssociates,Inc;2006.
48. BiodiversityofMarineEukaryotes.http://biomarks.eu. 77. V4ciliatesequencedataset.http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1263932.
49. EdgcombV,OrsiW,BungeJ,JeonS,ChristenR,LeslinC,etal.Protistan 78. SupportinginformationtoV4ciliatesequencesdataset.http://dx.doi.org/
microbialobservatoryintheCariacoBasin:CaribbeanIPyrosequencingvs 10.6084/m9.figshare.1264009.
Sangerinsightsintospeciesrichness.ISMEJ.2011;5:1344–56. 79. Manualfordepositedfiles.http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1264013.
50. OrsiW,EdgcombV,JeonS,LeslinC,BungeJ,TaylorGT,etal.Protistan 80. HalaryS,McInerneyJO,LopezP,BaptesteE.EGN:awizardforconstruction
microbialobservatoryintheCariacoBasin:CaribbeanIIHabitat ofgeneandgenomesimilaritynetworks.BMCEvolBiol.2013;13:146.
specialization.ISMEJ.2011;5:1357–73. 81. Networkanalysesinputfile.http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1263925.

Forsteretal.BMCBiology (2015) 13:16 Page16of16
82. BastianM,HeymannS,JacomyM.Gephi:anopensourcesoftwarefor
exploringandmanipulatingnetworks.ICWSM.2009;8:361–2.
http://gephi.github.io/.
83. CsárdiG,NepuszT.Theigraphsoftwarepackageforcomplexnetwork
research.InterJournalComplexSystems.2006;1695:1–9.
84. TheRprojectforstatisticalcomputing.http://R-project.org.
85. SimpsonEH.Measurementofdiversity.Nature.1949;163:688.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color figure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

