I
MARINE ECOLOGY PROGRESS SERIES
Vol. 52: 39-53, 1989 Published February 16
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser.
Vertical distribution of planktonic ciliates -
an experimental analysis of swimming behaviour
Per R. Jonsson
Tjarno Marine Biological Laboratory, P1. 2781, S-452 00 Stromstad, Sweden
ABSTRACT: Many marine planktonic ciliates accumulate close to the water surface or around the
pycnocline. Similar vertical distribution patterns are repeated if natural or cultured populations are
allowed to swim in an experimental water-column. Turbulence, light, pycnocline or chemical gradients
do not seem to be necessary to explain the accumulation close to the surface. It is suggested that gravity
is the ultimate cause for directed swimming towards the surface, although no evidence could be found
for a statocyst-like mechanoreceptor. Experimental analysis of ciliate models in glycerol and manipula-
tions of ciliate density as well as medium density indicate that the negative geotaxis results from
interactions between sinking velocity, swimming velocity, tumbling rate and shape or density asym-
metry of the cell. This is supported by the lability of the geotaxis which can be reversed by changing
temperature or light intensity which correlate with changes in swimming patterns. Measurements of
vertical velocities show that the cihates studied can move between 1 and 2.5m h-' and this may
determine, together with water turbulence, the vertical distribution of planktonic ciliates. A simple
stochastic model was constructed in an attempt to study the combined effects of vertical swimming
velocity and water turbulence. This model explains the different distribution patterns observed in the
field as a function of the relative magnitude of vertical swimming velocity and water turbulence rate.
The ecological significance of a possible ability of planktonic ciliates to influence their vertical
distribution is discussed.
INTRODUCTION modulated by physiological status. Microscale
behaviour of bacteria has also been suggested (Azam &
The recognition of Protozoa, such as heterotrophic Ammerman 1984); motile bacteria may accumulate
flagellates and ciliates, as important predators on pico- around algal cells through a chemokinetical response
and nanoplankton in the marine pelagial (Spittler 1973, to exudate gradients. In lakes, chemokinetic and
Heinbokel 1978, Capriulo 1982, Fenchel 1982, Rassoul- photokinetic responses have been shown to influence
zadegan 1982, Azam et al. 1983, Andersen & Sorensen the vertical distributions in some ciliates (Finlay et al.
1986, Jonsson 1986, Verity 1986, Sherr & Sherr 1987) 1987). In loxodid ciliates a mechanoreceptor based
calls for more detailed studies of the functional biology geotaxis has been demonstrated (Fenchel & Finlay
of these groups of organisms. An interesting question 1984, 1986).
with profound implications for plankton ecology is to Marine planktonic ciliates mainly feed on nano-
what extent plankters are able to orient in response to sized prey (Rassoulzadegan & Etienne 1981, Capriulo
environmental stimuli. The best known behaviour of 1982, Jonsson 1986, Verity 1986) including many
plankters is the diurnal vertical migration of many autotrophic flagellates. In neritic areas, primary pro-
mesozooplankters, with some of them migrating sev- duction is confined to a thin surface layer, and prey
eral l00 m (e.g. Marshal1 & Orr 1955, Longhurst 1976). availability for ciliates decreases with depth with a
Phototaxic behaviour of many autotrophs is also well marked reduction below the pycnocline. Because
established although the ecological significance of ciliates are denser than seawater, they face the risk
such behaviour is mostly unknown. Natural popula- of sinking out of the surface layer. An interesting
tions of dinoflagellates show diurnal changes in their possibility is that planktonic ciliates, through directed
vertical distribution (Hasle 1950, Eppley et al. 1968), motility, may compensate for sinking and even move
and experimental studies (Eppley et al. 1968, Heany & towards the prey-rich surface waters. Some previous
Eppley 1981) indicate that this is caused by phototaxis, studies support this possibility: planktonic ciliates
O Inter-ResearcWPrinted in F. R. Germany

40 Mar Ecol. Prog. Ser. 52. 39-53, 1989
have been found most concentrated near the water Experimental vertical profiles. Vertical distribution
surface (Cillbricht 1955, Vitiello 1964, Beers & of planktonic ciliates, either cultured or natural popula-
Stewart 1969, Middlebrook et al. 1987). However, no tion~,w as studied in wide lOOml test tubes (200x
study has specifically dealt with the possible mechan- 25 mm). At least 2 replicates of the test tubes were filled
isms by which non-random distributions of planktonic with ciliates and incubated in the dark. To reduce
ciliates are maintained in the sea. Here I report a convection currents within the tubes these were kept in
detailed study of vertical distributions of marine a stirred water bath. All experiments were perfol-med
planktonic ciliates and an analysis of swimming during the day. The vertical distribution of a population
behaviour designed to investigate the possibility that was monitored by taking samples (0.2 to 3 rnl, depend-
many planktonic ciliates can influence their vertical ing on ciliate concentration) at 4 or 5 depths from the
position in the water-column. surface to the bottom of the tubes (150 mm depth).
Ciliates were then fixed with Lugol's and counted in
sedimentation chambers on an inverted microscope. In
MATERIALS AND METHODS separate experiments the effects of changes in light
intensity and temperature on vertical distribution were
Material. Both cultured and natural populations of studied.
planktonic ciliates were used. Strombidium reticulatum In order to test if a pycnocline can prevent planktonic
(Leegaard), Lohmanniella oviformis Leegaard and Tin- ciliates from moving downwards, an experiment with
tinnopsis carnpanula (Ehrenberg) were isolated from an artificial halocline was designed. Natural seawater
the Kosterfjord. Sweden, and cultured as described in containing ciliates was collected from the surface, and
Jonsson (1986). some of the water was filtered through a GF/C filter.
Field vertical profiles. The sampling site was located The filtered seawater from the surface was mixed with
near the shores (gm water depth) of the Kosterfjord on filtered seawater from 40 m depth which had a higher
the west coast of Sweden. This area is influenced by salinity (33 ppt). This yielded a salinity approximately
brackish water coming from the Baltic and flowing 4ppt above that of the original surface water. Test
north along the coast. Occasionally freshwater from the tubes (100 ml) were filled to a depth of 100mm with
Norwegian river Glomma may also affect the Koster- unfiltered surface water, and then the filtered, more
fjord. This results in great variations in salinity of the saline seawater, was gently introduced at the bottom.
surface water, which varies between 16 and 31 ppt. This artificial halocline was about 5 times steeper than
Normally, a pronounced halocline is present at 2 to the most extreme gradients which I have observed in
10m depth with salinity approaching 31 to 33ppt the field. As a control, filtered surface water (without
below 40 m. With a hand-worked pump (Nalgene) and increased salinity), but slightly cooled to reduce mix-
a 5 m hose samples were taken at 0.2 m intervals from ing, was introduced at the bottom. After l h, samples
the surface down to 2m depth, and at 0.4 m intervals (3m l) were collected from 5 depths from surface to the
between 2 to 5m depth. All samplings were made bottom (150 mm depth). Samples were fixed with
around mid-day. Samples, 50 or 100 ml, were fixed Lugol's, and ciliates were counted in sedimentation
with acid Lugol's and centrifuged (1000 xg, 15 min). chambers. At the termination of the experiment, salin-
Centrifuged plankton was transferred to 3 m1 sedimen- ity at the 5 sampling depths was measured to check
tation counting chambers, and clliates were identified that the halocline had remained ~ntact.
and counted using an inverted microscope (Nikon Measurements of vertical velocity. Vertical velocity
Diavert, 100 to 200x). Identification was sometimes of ciliates was measured using 2 different methods.
facilitated by observations of living ciliates. The tax- Velocities of Laboea strobila, Parafavella denticulata
onomy of naked oligotrich ciliates (suborder Oligotri- and Tintinnopsis campanula were measured as
china) is largely based on insufficient descriptions and averages for individual ciliates swimming in a vertical
the names used here may be regarded as provisional column. In Strombidium reticulatum, S. cf. emergens
following Leegaard (1915). Identification of tintinnids and Lohmanniella ovlformis the upward drift of an
(suborder Tintinnina) was based on the lonca descrip- initially homogeneously suspended population was
tions of Marshal1 (1969). This also poses some prob- measured. This was done by counting ciliates moving
lems, particularly for species agglutinating foreign par- upwards and downwards as a function of time at the
ticles to the lorica, because of lorica polymorphlsm top of a 115 mm vertical water-column. The cumulative
(Bakker & Phaff 1976, Laval-Peuto & Brownlee 1986). net migration was plotted against time, and reached an
On each sampling occasion temperature and salinity equilibrium level when steady-state was achieved and
profiles were recorded using a YSI-33 salinometer the net migration was zero. Division of the depth of the
From these profiles, density profiles were calculated column with time indicated by extrapolation of the
according to Cox et al. (1970). initial linear part of the curve to the equilibrium level is

Jonsson: Vertical distribution of ciliates 4 1
the mean vertical drift of the population (Fenchel & reorientation rate was measured on living cells. This
Finlay 1984). was possible because this ciliate hovers while feeding.
Swimming patterns. In connection with the studies of At regular intervals (a few seconds), this hovering is
vertical distribution in experimental columns, swim- interrupted by swift jumps (about 3000 pm S-'). During
ming patterns were recorded with a video camera the hovering phase, ciliates could be seen to reorient
(Panasonic camera WVP-100E and NV-180 tape- until the membranelle zone was pointing upwards and
recorder) fitted to a horizontally mounted dissecting the rate of change was measured.
microscope (Wild M5, 12 to 25x). Sequences were Models in glycerol. To study the effect of density
played frame by frame (25 S-'), and the position of and drag asymmetry on reorientation of a body sinking
individual ciliates was plotted on plastic sheets in a viscous fluid, experiments with scale-models sink-
attached to the screen. Swimming velocities and tum- ing in glycerol were performed. The models were
bling rates were quantified from these tracings. shaped as ellipsoids slightly polnted at one end, 3 mm
Test of chemosensory responses. To test if the vertical in cross section and made of rubber with a density of
distribution of planktonic ciliates was affected by prey 1.31 g cm-3. Reynolds number of the sinlung models
density, presumably through chemosensory responses, were ca IO-~an d should appropriately scale sinking
behaviour in prey gradients was studied. Vertical prey ciliates with viscous force predominating. The effect of
gradients were created by filling 50 m1 test tubes (200 X a density asymmetry was studied by gluing small
18 mm) to a height of 30mm with a suspension of the pieces of plasticine (density 1.91 g cmp3) of varying size
autotrophic flagellate, Pyrarnimonas sp. (ca 105 cells on the models. The plasticine pieces were flattened out
m]-'), and then adding filtered and autoclaved seawater on the pointed end to reduce changes in the shape of
up to 150 mm height. To reduce mixing, the salinity of the model. A possible drag asymmetry due to the mem-
the filtered top water was reduced by 3 ppt and the test branelle zone was simulated using varying numbers of
tubes were placed in a stirred water bath. Cultured small pieces of plastic film fixed like membranelles on
Strombidiurn reticulatum were then introduced into the the blunt end of the model. Sinking models were video
prey suspension at the bottom. After 1 h, samples (2 ml) recorded using a macro-lens, and reorientation was
were taken at 5 depths. Similar experiments in test tubes followed frame by frame as described above for swim-
containing filtered and autoclaved seawater, with and ming ciliates.
without salinity stratification, served as controls. Manipulation of ciliate and medium density.
Because it may be difficult to distinguish between Density of Tintinnopsis campanula and medium were
chemical and mechanical responses of a predator, a manipulated in order to determine if the density of the
simpler experiment was also performed. Small capillary lorica of tintinnids affects vertical swimming. In nature,
tubes (10 X 0.5 mm) were filled with centrifuged flagel- T. carnpanula agglutinate foreign particles, such as
lates (Pyramimonas sp.) or bacteria (Pseudornonas sp.) mineral grains and diatom frustules to its lorica. This
and placed in culture dishes containing filtered and ability was utilized to change the density of the lorica.
autoclaved seawater. Cultured S. reticulatum and S. Latex beads (5.8 pm) were added to the culture
vestiturn were then added to the culture dishes. medium, and newly divided tintinnids were allowed to
Accumulation or behavioural change in the ciliates build their loricae with these beads. Latex beads have a
around the capillary tubes were monitored with a dis- density of 1.025 g cm-3 which is close to that of sea-
secting microscope. water, thus making the lorica Lighter than natural
Sinking and reorientation rates. Sinking rates of loricae which contain mineral grains. Tintinnids with
Os04-fixed (2 % w/v) Strornbidiurn reticulatum, Strorn- the 2 kinds of loricae were allowed to swim upward
bidium sp., Tintinnopsis campanula and T. parvula from the bottom of a culture dish. The time taken to
were measured in spectrophotometer cells in stirred swim from the bottom to the surface was measured.
water-baths. The sinking of individual ciliates was fol- Vertical velocity was first measured for tintinnids
lowed with a horizontally mounted dissecting micro- swimming in filtered seawater, then the same individu-
scope. When fixed individuals of S. reticulatum and als were transferred to a medium made of a mixture of
Strombidiurn sp. sink, they reorient so that the cells are seawater and deuteriumoxide (heavy water) with a
aligned along the vertical axis with the membranelle density of 1.052 g cmp3. The mixture was prepared by
zone upwards. To measure this reorientation rate, mixing deuteriumoxide and partly evaporated (40 ppt)
ciliates were studied in a spectrophotometer cell as seawater to yield seawater of 25 ppt containing about
described above. The water with fixed ciliates was 35 O/O deuteriumoxide.
stirred for a few seconds making orientation of ciliates Computer simulation. A simple model was con-
more or less random. When stirring ceased, the time to structed to simulate the vertical distribution of planktonic
reorient from 135 to 45" (0" when membranelle zone is ciliates as a function of vertical swimming velocity and
upward) was measured. For Lohmanniella oviformis, turbulent diffusion. The model assumes that turbulence

,P
0
-
)m( W
htpeD Y
L
n
C
)m(
htpeD
-i
P
30 W n V
o
O
-
)m( )m(
N
htpeD W htpeD
a
C
+
- ' -$
; .E - G
:"Y
g ." 6 W V
0
y m
N
)m(
y
htpeD
e
-
~
1 .h .E .g -$
5 .n( "Y G W V

Jonsson: Vertical distribution of ciliates
nopsis campanula are allowed to swim in a 100 m1 test
tube set in a water-bath, members of all species
accumulate close to the surface (Fig. 3). Experiments
were carried out in darkness and in the absence of
turbulence since heat convection was negligible. No
obvious gradients of food particles were observed.
Observations of swimming ciliates reveal that the non-
random vertical distribution is caused by net upward
swimming. The average upward velocity component
IOI! I.Ulh 1031 I O?J ranges from 260 to 690 pm S-' (Table 1) which is more
Density (9 cni-' ) Abundance (cells or loricae I-' ) than half of the swimming speed of the studied species,
thus indicating high directionality.
Fig. 2. Tinhnnopsisparvula. Vertical distnbution at midday on The distribution of dividing Strombidium reticulatum
May 6, 1987 of living cells (black) and empty loricae (stippled) differs drastically from that of non-dividing cells and is
heavily skewed towards the bottom (Fig. 4). Oligotrich
rate decays exponentially downwards and is reduced to ciliates have apokinetal stomatogenesis, causing the
10 % at the pycnocline depth. Turbulence is simulated as newly developed membranelle zone to point in the
a l-dimensional random walk given by K = U2T/2,w here opposite direction to the parental membranelles. This
K = turbulence rate; U = up- or downward velocity of disrupts normal swimming behaviour and causes a
water; T = time between changes of direction (Fenchel& reduced swimming velocity, an increased sinking ve-
Finlay 1984). locity and peculiar swimming paths. These changes of
swimming behaviour probably cause dividing cells to
RESULTS accumulate at the bottom.
Field vertical profiles
Effects of light and temperature
Vertical distribution of some natural populations of
planktonic ciliates from 5 sampling occasions are shown The lability of the surface-skewed distribution was
in Fig. l. Depth and development of the pycnocline demonstrated by changing light intensity or tempera-
varied considerably between sampling dates as shown ture. In Fig. 5 accumulation towards the surface of
by the density profiles mainly as a result of variations in Strombidium reticulatum is reversed when light ~nten-
surface water salinity. It is obvious that most ciliate sity suddenly drops. The change in vertical distribution
species show a pronounced non-random distribution and is accompanied by a reduction in swimming velocity
the most striking feature is the accumulation close to the and time between tumbles (Fig. 6). The changes in
surface or around the pycnocline. Many species have a vertical distribution and swimming pattern are mainly
bimodal distribution with local maxima close to the temporary. After l h, swimming speed increases but
surface and around the pycnocline, and for most of the remains somewhat lower than in the light, and the
observed ciliates the abundance drops suddenly below ciliates once more accumulate at the surface. A similar
the pycnocllne. There is some variation between the pattern is found if temperature is lowered. A reduction
species. Tontonia gracillima, Strombidium conicum and
Leprotintinnus pellucidus have a weaker tendency to
Table 1. Vertical velocity of some planktonic ciliates, either
accumulate close to the surface than tintinnids like L. directly measured on individual ciliates (mean f SE) (I), or
bottnicus, Tintinnidium sp., Tintinnopsis parvula, T. based on the time taken for a population to reach a steady-
campanula and Hel~costomellas ubulata. In Fig. 2 the state vertical distribution (S). See text for further information
vertical distribution of living T. parvula and empty
loricae are compared. The distribution of empty loricae Species Method Vertical velocity
clearly differs from that of the living cells and the relative (pm s-~)
abundance of empty loricae increases with depth.
Laboea strobia I
Parafavella den ticulata I
Tintinnopsis campanula I
Experimental vertical profiles Lohmanniella oviformjs S
Strombidium cf. emergens S
Strombidium reticula tum S
When cultures of Strombidium reticulatum, Lohman-
niella oviformis and natural populations of S. vestitum, ' Sample size
S. cf. emergens, Helicostomella subulata and Tintin-

44 Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 52: 39-53, 1989
Abund'111ce( cells nil-' ) Abundnnce (cells ml ' )
Ahundancc (cclls nil ' l
Pig. 3. Vertical distribution of 5 species of planktonic ciliates in
experimental water-columns
in temperature from 18 to 4'C strongly affects the ciliate behaviour is seen in Fig.9; Strombidium retlcu-
distributions of S. reticulatum and S. cf. emergens as latum accumulated at the surface irrespective of the
shown in Fig. 7, and drastically reduces swimming presence or absence of a halocline. Observations of
speed of S. reticulatum (Table 2). individual S. reticulatum and Tintinnopsis campanula
starting from the bottom of a test tube and swimming
through a steep halocline (ca 0.5ppt cm-') reveal no
Halocline effects changes in upward swimming behaviour.
Although a pycnocline is not a necessary condition
for the observed accumulations of c~hateisn the experi- Chemosensory ability
mental water-columns, I tested if a pycnocline has any
effect on the vertical distribution. The aim was to test if Experiments show that even an extremely steep prey
an artificial halocline prevented ciliates from entering gradient, decreasing towards the surface, has no sig-
the more saline bottom water. The results in Fig. 8 show nificant effect on the vertical distribution of Strom-
some scatter but no essential difference can be seen bidium reticulatum (Fig. 9). Absence of responses to
between the halocline columns and the controls. food density is also evident when S, reticulatum or S.
Further evidence that a steep halocline does not affect vestitum swim through food patches, made with capil-

Jonsson: Vertical distribution of ciliates 45
n o. I 0.2 0.4
Propor~io~ofi cclls in division
Fig. 4. Strombidium reticulatum. Proportion (mean f SE) of
d1ivid ing cells as a function of column depth
;
Fig. 6. Strombidium reticulatum. Changes in swimming veloc-
-
ity (a) and time between tumbles (b) (mean f SE) following
sudden drop in light intensity
C5
-' loo 7
C lary tubes slowly lealung microalgae and bacteria.
U
When these ciliates approach or swim through a food
IS patch they change neither swimming velocity nor
tumbling rate and their distributions remain random
relative to the food patches.
-
E
Hydrodynamical reorientation
---
- When fixed oligotrich ciliates are allowed to sink
,,.
ij - through the water, the cells start to reorient until the
A-,$.
anterior end points upwards. As seen in Table3, this
reorientation of the cells is very fast, 10 to 30° s l ,in fact
T T
so fast that it was difficult to measure. Unfortunately, I
'
Abundance (cells rnl
could not obtain any meaningful measurements of
reorientation rate of tintinnids because all species
Fig. 5. Strombidium reticulatum. Vertical distribution (2
replicates) in fight (black) and 15 rnin after sudden drop in tested contract into the lorica on fixation. Since the
light intensity (stippled) observed reorientation of oligotnch ciliates may be a
Srrombidium cf. emergens Slrombidium rericularum
Abundance (cclls rnl ' )
Fig. 7. Vertical distribution of Strombidium cf. emergens (2 replicates) and S. reticulatum in 18°C (black) and in 4 'C (stippled)

46 Mar Ecol. Prog. Ser. 52: 39-53, 1989
Table 2. Strombidium reticulatum. Swimming velocity (+_SE)
as a function of temperature
Temperature ("C) Swimming velocity (pm S-')
18.5 1070 f 73 (14)'
4 410 f 28 (14)
Sample size
I 10
Abundance (cells ml ' )
~p I0
Abundance (cells rnl-' ) Abundance (cells m1 ' '
IU
Abundancc (cells rnl ' )
Fig. 9. Strombidium reticulatum. Effect of prey gradient on
Abundance (cells rnl-l ) vertical distribution. (a) Prey gradient decreasing towards
surface in a salinity-stratified column; (b) without prey in a
Fig. 8. Vertical distribution of planktonic ciliates in columns salinity-stratified column; (c) without prey in a mixed column
with and without artificial halocline (2 replicates). (L) Strom-
bidium conicurn; (A) S. cf. emergens; (D) Tontonia gracilluna;
(a) HeLicostomella subulata; (0)T intinnopsis campanula; (0) Table 3. Sinking rates (& SE) and reorientation rates (t- SE) of
Favella ehrenbergii some planktonic cillates Results are for Os04-flxed cells,
except for Lohmanniella oviformis where measurements were
made on living cells
possible mechanism for ciliates to swim upwards with
greater probability than downwards, an attempt was
Species Sinking Reorientation
made to analyze the causes of reorientation. Scale- rate (km S-') rate (" S-')
models of ciliates were allowed to sink in a column of
+
glycerol where viscosity and dimensions of the models Strombidium reticulatum 29 2.5 (19)' 33 f 2.9 (15)
+
were chosen to simulate a hydrodynamical situation Strom bidium sp. 29 2 (26) 22 C 2 (24)
Lohmanniella onformis nd" 9.3 +- 0.7 (20)
where viscous forces predominate. When an ellipsoid
Tintinnopsis parvula 72 2 9 (6) nd
model is dropped in the glycerol column, it starts to Tintinnopsis lobiancoi 104 2 5.9 (2) nd
sink, but keeps its initial orientation. In the first series Empty loricae of 66+4.1(4) nd
of experiments, the density distribution of a model was T lobiancoi
manipulated with small weights at the posterior end.
Sample size
Fig. 10a illustrates increases in reorientation rate with " Not determined
density asymmetry; without density asymmetry

Jonsson: Vertical distribution of ciliates 47
function of the number of plastic 'membranelles' is
shown in Fig. lob. Without 'membranelles' reorienta-
tion rate is zero; it increases with the number of 'mem-
branelles'. Note that reorientation rates of scale-models
can only be used qualitatively since sinking rates
measured as cell lengths per unit time did not scale.
UU I?: 11 2 a G X
Aboral u.cight (m=) Tintinnid density asymmetry
E
It is tempting to suggest that the lorica of tintinnids is
denser than the cell and would cause reorientation of
tintinnids resulting in a greater probability to swim
upwards. To test this hypothesis an experiment was
designed where density of both a tintinnid, Tintinnopsis
campanula, and the medium were manipulated. By
allowing tintinnids to build their lorica with latex beads
the lorica became less dense as apparent from the
reduction in sinking velocity shown in Table4. The
vertical velocity of the two kinds of tintinnids was first
Fig. 10. Reorientation rate of scale models sinlung in glycerol
measuredin seawater with normal density and then they
as a function of (a) aboral \veight and (b) membraneue
number, Arrow indicates the approximate scaled density Were transferred to Seawater with increased density by
asymmetry in Strombidiunl species mixing seawater and deutel-lumoxide (heavy water). As
a control of any physiological changes caused by
deuteriumoxide the ciliates were finally transferred back
(weight = 0) reorientation rate is 0. Planktonic ciliates
to seawater again and the vertical velocity was measured
of the family Strombidiidae have cortical polysac-
immediately. The results (Table 4) show that there is a
charide plates which cover the posterior end. Since
statistical difference (p < 0.001) in vertical velocity
polysaccharide is denser than cell contents, the cell
between both the kinds of loricae and between the
should show some density asymmetry. This was
media, and the vertical velocities correlate positively
roughly calculated assuming a density of the 1 pm thick
with increased density asymmetry. The vertical vel-
polysaccharide plates of 1.5g and a cell density of
ocities measured in seawater before and after transfer to
1.07 g cm-" The density asymn~etryo f the scale-model
the deuteriumoxide-containing medium are not signifi-
corresponding to the calculated asymmetry of the cili-
cantly different (p > 0.05) although there is a trend of
ate is shown with an arrow in Fig. 10a. In the second
increasing velocity in the last treatment.
series of experiments I investigated the effect of shape
asymmetry on reorientation rate. The most asymmetri-
cal feature of oligotrich ciliates is the oral zone of DISCUSSION
membranelles. Individual membranelles were imitated
by small pieces of plastic film which were fixed to the Previous works show that natural populations of
anterior part of the model. Reorientation rate as a marine planktonic ciliates often exhibit non-random
Table 4. Tintinnopsis campanula. Vertical velocity (fS E) and sinking velocity (+ SE) as a function of ciliate and medium density.
Density of ciliates was manipulated by letting tintinnids incorporate latex beads instead of mineral particles in their lorica;
medium density was changed by mixing seawater with deuteriumoxide. Control of vertlcal velocity in sea-water was made after
treatment with medium containing deuteriumoxide
Type of lorica p = 1.021 g cm-3 p = 1.052 g cm-3 Control: p = 1.021 g
Sinking velocity Vertical velocity Sinking velocity Vertical velocity Vertical velocity
Mineral particles 122 5* 16 (6)' 260 2 42 (7) 87 f 6.9 (6) l60 k 29 (7) 310 5 38 (7)
Latex beads 67 5.2 (7) 64 5 19 (11) 44 f 2.5 (4) 34 f 5.2 (11) 140 2 61 (9)
' Sample size
p<0.001 for vertical velocity between lorica types and between medium densities (2-way ANOVA)
p> 0.05 for vertical velocity between seawater medium before and after treatment with deuteriumoxide (Mann-Whltney)

48 Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 52: 39-53, 1989
vertical distributions (Gillbricht 1955, Vitiello 1964, change of concentration during a path length (the dis-
Beers & Stewart 1969, Middlebrook et al. 1987). Gener- tance moved between tumbles) and suppress the
ally the distributions are skewed towards the water tumbling rate when they are swimming up a favour-
surface, particularly for many tintinnids. Similar dis- able gradient. This so-called transient response is
tribution patterns are found in the present study, and much more efficient than a simple kinetic response,
detailed sampling reveals that distributions differ provided that the gradient is sufficiently steep. As a
between species of planktonic ciliates. Considering rough example, I assume a ciliate like S. reticulatum
reproduction, mortality, stratification of water, wave swimming in a helix with a swimming speed of 1000
and wind driven turbulence, a random vertical dis- btm S-' (Table 4) yielding a transportation rate of 500
tribution can hardly be expected. But in addition to pm S-' and a tumbling frequency of 0.25 S-' (Fig. 6b). If
these non-adaptive processes, there is the interesting tumbling rate is suppressed to 0.15 S-' when the ciliate
possibility that ciliates may, by directed motility, influ- covers 75 % of the maximum upward gradient in one
ence their vertical distribution. The strongest indication path length, a stochastic simulation shows that the
from the field profiles that ciliate motility may influence vertical velocity would be about 150 Itm S-'. This is not
vertical distribution is the difference in distribution far from the vertical velocities actually found (Table 1).
between tintinnids and their empty loricae (Fig. 2). The However, it is difficult to find gradients over several
empty loricae show a distribution more skewed to the meters long which are sufficiently steep so that a ciliate
bottom than living tintinnids, although living tintinnids may sense a change in one path length of some mm.
have greater sinking velocity than empty loricae Chemosensory orientation in ciliates may be important
(Table 3). However, it is difficult to conclude from mere on a microscale, e.g. when a predator approaches a
field studies which mechanisms are causing the prey, but it is probably safe to assume that it is not
observed vertical distrj.butions and to evaluate the con- important in modest gradients over several meters.
tribuhon of ciliate swimming behaviour
To study individual mechanisms, vertical distribu-
tions of planktonic ciliates were studied in experimental Geotaxis
water-columns. These show that the accumulation at
the surface is not dependent on light, stratified water or A possible cue to vertical orientation is of course
turbulence. Haloclines many times steeper than found gravity. Many protists are known to swim upwards or
in the field do not significantly affect vertical distribu- downwards in the absence of other stimuli. This has
tion and ciliates swimming through steep haloclines do been described as geotaxis. True geotaxis mediated by
not exhibit changes in tumbling beha.v~ouro r obvious a statocyst-like mechanoreceptor has recently been
changes in swimming velocity. I therefore hypothesize demonstrated for a limnic ciliate (Fenchel & Finlay
that the observed accumulation around the pycnocline 1984, 1986), but so far this is only known for the ciliate
in the field is not caused by behavioural responses to the family Loxodidae. Roberts (1970, 1981) has explained
salinity and temperature gradient but rather is a result of other cases of apparent geotaxis as a result of sinlung
reduced turbulence, as discussed below. velocity and some asymmetry of the cell, either in
Absence of behavioural responses to patches of con- density or hydrodynamical drag. When a cell which is
centrated bacteria and algae indicates that chemical denser then the medium sinks through the water an
gradients are of minor importance as a cause of the asymmetry in density will cause the centre of buoyancy
oriented responses of the ciliates I studied. It is striking
to compare the planktonic species of Strombidium hav-
ing an apparently weak chemical response to prey,
with the efficient kinetic response in, the benthic Strom-
bidium sulcatum (Fenchel & Jonsson 1988).B y theoret-
ical considerations, it is possible to further examine the
potential of chemical gradients for vertical orientation
in the pelagial. Assuming a kinetic response to a prey
gradient, the time taken for a ciliate to move from one
end of the gradient to the other can be calculated to be
of the order of 12/~,w, here 1 = length of the gradient;
D,. = motility (diffusion coefficient) of th.e ciliate (Okubo
1980, Fenchel 1987). If D, is about 1 mm2 S ' , which is Fig. 11 Schematic drawing showing (a) separation of the
centre of gravity, g, and the centre of buoyancy. B, and the
typical of many ciliates, a vertical gradient of 1 m would
induced torque, R, due to density asyrnn~etrya nd (h) separa-
take on average 10d to swim through. Another possi- tion of the centre of gravity and the centre of drag, D, due to
bility for ciliates to onent in a gradient is by sensing the shape aqrnmetry

Jonsson: Vertical distr~butiono f c~liates 49
and the centre of gravity to be separated and a gravity study, the distributions are expected to be much more
induced torque will start to reorient the cell until the skewed to the surface than actually found in the water-
centres are aligned with the force of gravity (Fig. lla). column experiments (Fig. 3). One explanation for this
An asymmetry in shape, with accompanying asym- discrepancy is that the high reorientation rates,
metry in hydrodynamical drag, will reorient the cell in between 20 and 30" S ' , w ere obtained from measure-
an analogous way until the centre of gravity and the ments on fixed non-motile ciliates. In swimming
centre of drag align with the force of gravity (Fig. 1l b). c~liates,t he reorientation component caused by the
If there is a front-rear asymmetry, the cell will either drag of the membranelles will only be effective when
swim downwards or upwards. It can also be shown that ciliates stop swimming, e.g. during tumbles. This is
for cells reorienting with the anterior end upward, the indicated by the low reorientation rate of living
vertical position is a balance between swimming veloc- Lohmanniella oviformis, where reorientation is pre-
ity, sinking velocity, tumbling rate and reorientation sumably caused by the membranelles when this ciliate
rate (Roberts 1970). In summary, it can be concluded 'hovers' between sudden jumps. Another important
that although no gravity sensing organelle is present a characteristic of real populations that makes the dis-
ciliate may respond to gravity through interactions tribution broader, is the great variation in behaviour
between sinking velocity and the morphology of the between individuals, e.g. between dividing and non-
cell. The ciliate can not perceive the direction of grav- dividing cells (Fig. 4). Unfortunately, it is difficult to
ity, so it is not a true taxis, and instead I will here refer formulate a model of vertical distribution that includes
to it as passive geotaxis. this individual variation of reorientation rates, sinking
In none of the planktonic ciliates studied have I velocity and swimming behaviour.
found a mechanoreceptor that might function as a The experiment with manipulations of the density of
gravity sensor. Fenchel & Finlay (1984) calculated that Tintinnopsis campanula and its medium strongly sug-
to overcome Brownian motion a statocyst must be at gests that the lorica of tintinnids has an effect on
least a few microns and thus lt should be visible in light reorientation of the cell resulting in upward swimming.
microscopy. A mechanoreceptor must affect the activity The use of deuteriumoxide (heavy water) first requires
of the cilia in order to mediate the direction of gravity to a cautionary remark. Deuteriumoxide is known to
an appropriate behavioural response. Geotaxic correc- affect the physiology of cells in various ways e.g. the
tion of ciliates deviating from the desired orientation structure of microtubuli. The concentrations of
probably always involves repeated tumbling with small deuteriumoxide I used in the experiments did not
changes of direction as described in Fenchel & Finlay apparently alter swimming speed and tumbling rate
(1984). No such tumbling behaviour was observed in but it can not be excluded that swimming behaviour
this study, instead changes in vertical orientation of might have been affected. However, the similar results
ciliates are smooth and continuous. The observations of vertical velocity in seawater obtained before and
that changes in light intensity and temperature reverse immediately after the treatment with deuteriumoxide
the vertical distribution (Figs. 5 and 7) and that this (Table 4) suggest that the differences in vertical veloc-
correlates with changes in swimming behaviour, also ity between seawater and the medium containing
suggest a labile, passive geotaxis rather than a mecha- deuteriumoxide are not caused by any physiological
noreceptor-based true geotaxis. change. From the experiments with T. carnpanula, I
The high reorientation rates found for fixed oligotnch conclude that the lonca creates a density asymmetry in
ciliates (Table 3),a nd experiments with scale-models in the tintinnid with the denser lorica inducing a torque
glycerol, suggest that asymmetries in density and drag tending to reorient the tintinnid with the lonca down-
could be mechanisms causing planktonic oligotrich wards. This would lead to the observed upward swim-
ciliates to swim upwards. They show a pronounced ming and accumulation at the surface. Reducing this
asymmetry in shape due to the oral membranelles and density asymmetry either by reducing weight of the
it seems reasonable to believe that the membranelles lorica with latex beads or by increasing the buoyancy
account for significant drag but contribute little to cell with a denser medium resulted in the expected reduc-
weight. This should reonent a cell with the anterior end tion of vertical velocity. Although not statistically
upwards. Furthermore, the posterior 'cap' of polysac- different, the trend of increased vertical velocity in
charide cortical plates should also contribute to this seawater after swimming in the deuteriumoxide
reorientation by malung the posterior end denser. medium may be explained by assuming that the large
Knowing the parameters of swimming behaviour, sink- space inside the lorica not occupied by the cell was
ing velocity and reorientation rate, the expected verti- initially filled with the deuteriumoxide mixture and the
cal distribution can be analytically calculated (Roberts density asymmetry in the tintinnid was further accentu-
1970) and compared to that actually found. If this is ated.
applied to the high reorientation rates found in this There is a great diversity of lorica shapes and build-

50 Mar Ecol. Prog. Ser. 52: 39-53, 1989
(Fenchel & Finlay 1984, 1986). Another possibility
would be an organelle sensitive to the direchon of light,
but phototaxis in ciliates has unambiguously only been
described in Stentor coeruleus (Song et al. 1980). The
lack of these perception organelles in tintlnnids and
oligotrichs may thus be due to phyletic constraints.
However, a true physiological taxis may also be a
disadvantage in the turbulent marine pelagial. Fre-
quent changes of the cell orientation caused by water
movements would trigger compensation responses to
Lorica diarnc1cr (pm) regain the upward orientation, including a series of
tumbles. During tumbles, ciliary beat is reversed and
Fig. 12. Lorica size in agglutinated (filled circles) and hyallne
feeding is interrupted, thus frequent disturbances
tintinnids (open squares). Isolines show where tintinnid sink-
ing velocity is 300 pm s-' as a function of lorica size and would reduce time for feeding. A passive geotaxis can
density (g cm-?) function constantly without interfering with feeding
activities. The reduced precision may not be important
ing materials among different species of tintinnids. in the marine pelagial where no steep gradients are
Some species agglutinate mineral particles to the lorica normally found. In contrast, loxodid ciliates are living
and other species build a hyaline lorica entirely of in low-turbulent environments where chemical gra-
organic substances. The vertical distribution of the dients are very steep. A vertical difference of a few mm
hyaline Helicostomella subulata shows that the posses- may be a matter of life and death and behavioural
sion of a lorica with mineral particles is not necessary responses with high precision are necessary. Here the
for upward swimming, but the experiments with Tin- ability of loxodid ciliates to perceive gravity is clearly of
tinnopsis campanula indicate that a lorica without min- great value.
eral particles results in reduced vertical velocity. A
lorica built of organic macro-molecules will still be
denser than the cell and may cause reorientation. It Ciliate movement and water turbulence
may be speculated that when mineral particles are
available a small agglutinated lorica results in suf- The vertical velocities of some planktonic ciliates
ficient reorientation. In tropical and off-shore areas shown in Table 1 obviously enable ciliates to concen-
where mineral particles are scarce, large hyaline trate at the surface in experimental water-columns
species often dominate. The construction of a large without any water turbulence, but will ciliate vertical
lorica of less dense organic material may be an alterna- velocities of 300 to 700 llm S-' be of any significance out
tive strategy to have a small, dense lorica to achieve in the turbulent pelagial? A strong biological indication
reorientation. It is probably also important that species that protists through motility may influence their verti-
building large loricae possess some mechanism that cal distribution comes from studies of diurnal vertical
prevents incorporation of mineral particles since sink- migrations of ciliates (Stoecker et al. 1984, McManus &
ing velocity will approach swimming velocity as the Fuhrman 1986) and dinoflagellates (e.g. Hasle 1950,
lorica becomes denser. This is illustrated in Fig. 12, Heaney & Eppley 1981). Data are most extensive for
where together with data gathered on lorica size (Mar- migrating dinoflagellates which have vertical velocities
shall 1969, Capriulo & Carpenter 1983, Verity 1987) for similar to or lower (Heaney & Eppley 1981) than found
species with agglutinated and hyaline loricae, isolines for the planktonic ciliates in this study, and their ability
for a sinking velocity of 300 pm S-' are shown as a of diurnal changes In distribution patterns shows that
function of lorica size and lorica density. The calcula- swimming behaviour is not negligible compared to
tions of sinking velocity assume a cylindrical shape of water movements.
tintinnids, that the cell completely fills the lorica, a cell The vertical turbulence of seawater is very difficult to
density of 1.07 g cm-3 and a Stokes radius. This roughly measure di.rectly, but if changes of salinity and temper-
shows that agglutination of the lorica constrains the ature in space and time are known indirect estimates
possible lorica size. are possible. Such estimates of vertical eddy diffusivity,
If many planktonic ciliates gain in fitness by directed which measures turbulent transport, has been found to
swimming upwards, why have not special percept~on vary greatly between 0.04 and 100 cm2 S-' depending
organelles evolved instead of the passive geotaxis sug- on wind, waves, depth, currents and denslty stratifica-
gested in this study? A statocyst-like mechanoreceptor tion (Defant 1961). Sundby (1983) presented a model
would be the obvious choice but this kind of organelle designed to describe the vertical distribution of pelagic
is presently known only in the ciliate family Loxodidae fish eggs. The model considers the combined effect of

Jonsson: Vertical distribution of ciliates
A bundance
Fig. 13. Simulation of vertical distribution as a function of turbulent diffusion and vertical swimming velocity. Vertical diffusivity
(K,) expressed as cm2 S-' was varied holding vertical swimming velocity at 0.05 cm S-' and the pycnocline at 2 m
vertical turbulence and the vertical velocity of posi- of the model are rather similar to a distribution process
tively buoyant eggs. The solution to the diffusion equa- with a kinetic response where motihty (diffusion coeffi-
tion is cient) differs between 2 environments. Accumulation
occurs in the environment with the lowest motility and
the steady-state distribution will be inversely pro-
where C(z) = concentration of eggs as a function of portional to the local motility (Okubo 1980). With low
depth z; C(a) = concentration of -e ggs at the depth a; turbulence, the diffusion rate is similar above and
W = vertical velocity of eggs; K eddy diffusivity. If below the pycnocline and the directed swimming
this model is applied to the vertical velocities found for results in accumulation at the surface. When turbu-
some planktonic ciliates, a significant accumulation of lence increases, the diffusion rate of ciliates is higher
ciliates at the surface results below an eddy diffusivity above the pycnocline and ciliates accumulate below
of around 25 cm' S-'. This indicates that planktonic where motility is lower. Directed movement causes
ciliates will be able to influence their vertical position ciliates to concentrate around the pycnocline where the
at least under some conditions of weather and hydro- transition of diffusion rates occurs. This model tenta-
graphy. Equation (1) assumes a completely mixed tively explains why many of the ciliates studied in the
water mass where the eddy diffusivity is constant with field showed local maxima around the pycnocline and
depth. Presence of a pycnocline will reduce eddy dif- the often sudden reduction in abundance below the
fusivity with increasing depth and this will influence pycnocline (Fig. 1). In addition, it suggests that differ-
the distribution of ciliates. In an attempt to simulate a ences in distribution patterns among species may be a
stratified water mass, a simple stochastic model was result of differences in swimming velocity.
constructed. The model considers a water-column with
2 layers separated by a pycnocline. Turbulence is simu-
lated as a stochastic vertical movement where the verti- Ecological implications
cal diffusivity (K,) decays exponentially with depth and
is 10 % of the surface value at the pycnocline. Ciliates If many planktonic ciliates have the ability to swim
in the water-column move upwards with a higher prob- upwards and to accumulate in surface waters, what are
ability than downwards in each time unit. Simulated on the ecological implications? A predator that can orient
a computer, this model produced the distribution pat- towards prey can grow at lower prey concentrations
terns shown in Fig. 13. The combined effect of swim- than a predator that moves randomly. Generally, suit-
ming behaviour and turbulence in this model yields able prey for ciliates are found in surface waters, and
qualitatively different distribution patterns as a func- prey decrease in abundance with depth. Vertical swim-
tion of the relative order of turbulence rate and ciliate ming would therefore increase the probability that a
vertical velocity. When turbulence is low relative to ciliate would move into and remain in areas rich in
vertical swimming velocity ciliates accumulate at the prey, and thus the ingestion rate of prey should be
surface but with increasing turbulence the distribution higher than if the ciliates movement were random. This
peak moves towards the pycnocline. At intermediate also bears on sampling strategy, where heterogeneous
turbulence bimodal distributions occur with maxima at distributions of ciliates may result in erroneous
the surface and around the pycnocline. The dynamics estimates of average abundance, reproduction and cal-

52 Mar Ecol. Prog. Ser. 52: 39-53, 1989
culated ingestion rates. The difference in distribution of Acknowledgements. I am grateful to Professor Anders Stige-
non-dlviding and dividing cells (Fig, 4) also calls for brandt for valuable discussions about turbulent water trans-
some caution when the frequency of dividing cells Port- I thank One referee greatly
improved the readability of the manuscript. This study was
(HagstrGm et 1979*C oats & HeinbOkel 1982) is used
supported by the Swedish Natural Science Research Council
as a measure of in situ reproduction rate. through contract B-DT 1860-107.
It may be speculated that differences in mean verti-
cal velocity will separate different species vertically,
thus reducing competition. The lability of the sug-
LITERATURE CITED
gested passive geotaxis as indicated in Figs. 5 to 7
could also alter vertical distributions of planktonic Andersen, P., Serrensen. H. M. (1986). Population dynamics
ciliates as a result of changes in water temperature and and trophlc coupling in pelagic , m icroA organism; in eu-
trophic coastal waters. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 33: 99-109
availability of mineraI particles for tintinnids. This
Azam, F., Ammerman, J. W. (1984).C ycling of organic matter
could affect the distributions of species differently
by bacterioplankton in pelagic marine ecosystems: mi-
according to their responses to changes in the environ- croenvironmental considerations. In: Fasham, M. J. R. (ed.)
ment. A species adapted to warm water may lose the Flows of energy and materials in marine ecosystems.
Plenum Press, New York, p. 345-360
ability to swim upwards in cold water if swimming
Azam, F., Fenchel, T., Field, J. G., Gray, J S., Meyer-Reil,
speed is reduced. Similarly, vertical distributions of
L. A., Thingstad, F. (1983). The ecological role of water-
tintinnid species may or may not be affected by availa- column microbes in the sea. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser 10:
bility of inorganic particles depending on the type of 257-263
lorica. If the vertical position in the water-column Bakker, C., Phaff, W. J. (1976).T intinnida from coastal waters
of the S. W.-Netherlands I. The genus Tintinnopsis Stein.
influences survival and reproduction rates, some
Hydrobiologia 50: 101-1 11
species may therefore be excluded from the pelagial
Beers, J. R., Stewart, G. L. (1969). The vertical distribution
under some conditions. Upward swimming could also of microzooplankton and some ecolog~calo bservations.
increase fitness in s~eciesw ith life-cvcles in which J. Cons. int. Explor. Mer 33: 30-44
encystment occurs .(Paranjape 1g8~: 1987). Capriulo, G. M. (i982). Feeding of field collected tintinnid
micro-zooplankton on natural food. Mar. Biol. 71: 73-86
excysting from cysts On the bottom Capriulo, G M,, Carpenter, E. J. (1983). Abundance, species
would be guided towards the surface by directed swim- composition and feeding- im -p act of tintinnid micro-zoo-
minq- . p elarn kton in central Lonq Island Sound. Mar. Ecol. Proq- .
Passive geotaxis is an example of how behaviour is 10: 277-288
affected by the morp~o~ogoyf the organism,~ ~ ~ ~Coats h, D. ~W., H leinb -okel , J. F. (1982).A study of reproduction
and other life cycle phenomena in planktonic protists
ogy is of course largely a result of physiological pro-
using an acridine orange fluorescence technique. Mar
cesses during ontogeny, but the behaviour is termed Biol. 67: 71-79
~assiveb ecause the reorientation rate of the indi- Cox, R. A., McCartney, M. J., Culkin, F. (1970). The specific
vidual ciliate may be viewed as a fixed trait deter- gravitY/saline/tem~eraturer elationsh~p in natural sea
water Deep Sea Res. 17: 679-689
mined by It is important to point Out that Defant, A. (1961). Physical Oceanography, Vol. I. Pergamon
even if this reorientation is a passive consequence of Press, Oxford
morphology it may still be an adaptation. If individuals Eppley, R. W., Holm-Hansen, O., Strickland, J. D. H. (1968).
-. - -
gain in fitness by upward swimming, due to certain Some observations on the vertical migration of dinoflagel-
heritable features of morphology, this will lead to lates. J. Phycol. 4: 333-340
Fenchel, T. (1982). Ecology of heterotrophic microflagellates.
evolution of reorientation by natural selection. This
IV Quantitative occurrence and importance as bacterial
also implies that if passive geotaxis increases fitness of consumers. Mar Ecol. Prog. Ser. 9: 35-42
.
ciliates inhabitina the ~elaaial,o nlv a limited set of Fenchel, T (1987). Ecology of Protozoa. Science Tech/
U U Springer Verlag, ~adisok
cell morphologies may be expected. Many unrelated
Fenchel, T., Finlay, B. J. (1984).G eotaxis in the ciliated proto-
planktonic ciliates such as species of Urotricha,
zoon Loxodes. J. exp. Biol. 110: 17-33
C~clotrjchjum,M esodinium, Tiarina and the Oligot- Fenchel, T., Finlay, B. J. (1986).T he structure and function of
richida share the possession of lonq oral cilia or mem- Miiller vesicles in Loxodid ciliates. J. Protozool. 33: 69-76
branelles arranged in a peristomial ring. It may be Fenchel, T., Jonsson. P. R. (1988). The functional bl010gy of
Strornbidium sulcatum, a marine oligotrich ciliate (Cilio-
speculated that this convergence of morphology is
phora, Oligotrichina). Mar Ecol. Prog. Ser. 48: 1-15
partly the of for an increased 'pward Finlay, B, J.,B erninger, ",-G, Stewart, J L,, Hind]e, R, M,,
reorientation of the cell. Davison, W. (1987). Some factors controlling the distribu-
Finally, I suggest that passive geotaxis, based on tion of two pond-dwelling ciliates with algal symbionts
(Frontonia vernalis and Euplotes daidaleos). J. Protozool.
density asymmetry, may also apply to some planktonic
34: 349-356
rotifer' (e'g' genus Kerate'a) and planktonic Gillbricht, M, (1955). Wucherungen Phytoplankton in
larvae of benthic invertebrates, e.g. molluscan veliger einem abqeschlossenen Hafenbecken. Helaolander wiss.
larvae.

Jonsson: Vertical distribution of ciliates 53
Hagstrom, A., Larsson, U ., Horstedt, P, Normark, S. (1979). ing cysts in a hyaline tintinnid, He/l~0St0mellas ubulata
Frequency of dividing cells, a new approach to the deter- (Ehre.)J srgensen J. exp. mar Biol. Ecol 48: 23-33
mination of bacterial growth rates in aquatic environ- Rassoulzadegan. F (1982).D ependence of grazing rate, gross
ments. Appl. environ. Microbial. 37. 805-812 growth efficiency and food size range on temperature in a
Hasle, G. R. (1950). Phototactic vertical migration in marine pelagic oligotrichous ciliate Lohnlanniella spiralis Leeg..
dinoflagellates. Oikos 2: 162-175 fed on naturally occurring partlculate matter Annls Inst.
Heaney, S. I., Eppley, R. W (1981). Light, temperature and oceanogr.. Paris 58: 177-184
nitrogen as interacting factors affecting die1 vertical migra- Rassoulzadegan, F., Etienne, M. (1981). Grazing rate of the
tions of dinoflagellates in culture. J. Plankton Res. 3: tintinnid Stenosemella ventricosa (Clap. & Lachm.) Jorg.
331-344 on the spectrum of the naturally occurring particulate
Heinbokel, J. F. (1978). Studies on the functional role of matter from a Mediterranean ner~tic area. Limnol.
tintinnids in the Southern California Bight. 11. Grazing Oceanogr 26: 258-270
rates of field populations. Mar Biol. 47: 191-197 Reid, P. C. (1987).M ass encystment of a planktonic oligotrich
Jonsson, P. R. (1986). Particle size selection. feeding rates and ciliate. Mar Biol. 95: 221-230
growth dynamics of marine planktonic oligotrichous Roberts, A. M. (1970). Geotaxis in motile micro-organisms.
ciliates (Ciliophora: Oligotrichina). Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser J. exp. Biol. 53: 687-699
33: 265-237 Roberts, A. M. (1981). Hydrodynamics of protozoan swim-
Laval-Peuto, M., Brownlee, D. C. (1986). Identification and ming. In: Levandowsky, M,, Hutner, S. H. (eds.)
systematics of the Tintinnina (Ciliophora): evaluation and Biochemistry and physiology of protozoa, Vol. 4. Academic
suggestions for improvement. Annls Inst oceanogr., Paris Press, New York, p. 5-66
62: 69-84 Sherr, E., Sherr, B. (1987). High rates of consumption of
Leegaard, C. (1915). Untersuchungen iiber einlge Plankton- bacteria by pelagic ciliates. Nature. Lond. 325: 710-711
ciliaten des Meeres. Nytt Mag. Natunrid. 53: 1-37 Song, P. S., Hader, D.-P., Poff, K. L. (1980). Phototactic orienta-
Longhurst, A. R. (1976). Vertical migration. In: Cushing, D. H., tion by the ciliate Stentor coeruleus. Photochem. Photobiol.
Walsh, J. J. (eds.) The ecology of the seas. Blackwell, 32: 781-786
Oxford, p. 116-137 Spittler, P. (1973). Feeding experiments with tintinnids. Oikos
Marshall, S. M. (1969). Protozoa order. Tintinnida. Cons. int. 15 (SUPPI.):1 28-132
Explor. Mer, Zooplankton Sheets No. 117-127 Stoecker, D. K., Davis, L H., Anderson, D M. (1984). Fine
Marshall, S. M., 01-r,A P. (1955). The biology of a marine scale spatial correlat~onsb etween plankton~cc iliates and
copepod Calanus finmarchicus (Gunnerus). Oliver and dinoflagellates. J. Plankton Res. 6: 829-842
Boyd, Edinburgh Sundby, S. (1983). A one-dimensional model for the vertical
McManus, G. B., Fuhrman, J. A. (1986). Photosynthetic pig- distribution of pelagic fish eggs in the mixed layer Deep
ments in the ciliate Laboea strobila from Long Island Sea Res. 30: 645-661
Sound, USA. J. Plankton Res. 8: 317-327 Verity, P. G. (1986). Grazing of phototrophic nanoplankton by
Middlebrook, K., Emerson, C. W., Roff, J. C., Lynn, D. H. microzooplankton In Narragansett Bay. Mar Ecol. Prog.
(1987). Distribution and abundance of tintinnids in the Ser. 29: 105-115
Quoddy Region of the Bay of Fundy. Can. J. Zool. 65: Venty, P. G. (1987).A bundance, community composition, size
594-601 distribution, and production rates of tintinnids in Narragan-
Okubo, A. (1980).D iffusion and ecological problems: mathe- sett Bay, Rhode Island. Estuar. coast. Shelf Sci. 24: 671-691
matical models. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Vitiello, P. (1964). Contribution a I'etude des Tintinnides de la
Paranjape, M. A. (1980). Occurrence and significance of re?+- baie d'Alger. Pelagos 2: 5-42
This article was submitted to the editor Manuscript received: July 27, 1988
Revised version accepted: Novem ber 2, 1988

