P.S.Z.N.: Marine Ecology, 19 (3): 229-243 (1998)
FI 1998 Blackwell Wissenschafts-Verlag, Berlin Accepted: June 17, 1998
ISSN 0173-9565
The Ecology of a Novel Symbiosis
Between a Marine Peritrich Ciliate and
Chemoautotrophic Bacteria
JORC A. OTT.M ONIKBAR IGHT& FRIEDRICSCHH IEMER
Institute of Zoology, University of Vienna, Althanstr. 14. A-1090 Vienna. Austria.
E-mail: joerg.ottm univie.ac.at
With 12 figures
Key words: Zoollrunrriiuni nii~euni.C iliophora, Peritrichida, sulfur bacteria, symbiosis.
mangal.
Abstract. A symbiosis between a sessile colonial ciliate, Zoolharnriiroir nii~cwrir( HEMPRICH & EHRENBERG.
1831). and chemolithoautotrophic bacteria oxidizing reduced sulfur compounds is described. The
ciliates and their ectosymbionts occur on mangrove peat in the Caribbean. The feather-shaped ciliate
colonies expand and contract, thus exposing the microbes alternately to oxygenated water above and
sulfidic water within the boundary layer developed on the surface of the highly sulfidic peat. The
symbioticciliates colonize sites with high sulfide flux where the microbial surface mat has been disturbed
and grow there until the microbe mat re-establishes itself.
Problem
Symbioses between chemolithoautotrophic sulfur-oxidizing bacteria and protists
or invertebrates are common in marine habitats where reduced sulfur compounds
are abundant. The discovery of animal communities around deep-sea hot vents
and cold seeps (for reviews see TUNNICLIFF19E9,1 , 1992; CHILDRE&SS F ISHER,
1992; CAVANAUG1H99, 4; NELSON& FISHER1,9 95; FISHER1,9 96) which depend
largely on the organic production of symbiotic bacteria that utilize sulfide as an
energy source for the reduction of carbon dioxide, has spurred the search for such
symbioses in shallow waters. Not surprisingly, similar microbe/animal associations
have been found in all marine sulfidic habitats such as sheltered and organic-rich
sediments, seagrass-rhizome mats and mangrove peat. The bacteria occur as ecto-
or endosymbionts and the animal hosts are protists (FENCHE&L FINLAY1.9 89;
BAUER-NEBELSPIIC aKl., 1996a,b), plathelminthes (OTT et al., 1982), nematodes
(OTT et al., 1982; OTT & NOVAK1 989), polychaetes (GIERE1, 996), oligochaetes
(GIERE1, 981), echiurids (MENON& ARP,1 993), priapulids (OESCHGE&R S CHMAL-
IOHANN, 1988), bivalves (CAVANAUCH, 1985; FELBECeKf a/., 1981), gastropods
(STEINet al., 1988),e chinoderms (TAMAReAt a l., 1993)a nd pogonophorans (SOUTH-
WARD et al., 1986).
U. S. Copyright Clearance Center Code Statement: 0 173-9565/98/1903-0229$14.00/0

230 OTT, BRIGHT & SC‘HIEMER
Among the protists, the genus Kenrrophoros (Ciliophora, Karyorelictida) is
known for a coat of bacteria on its dorsal side which act as a ‘kitchen garden’ for
this free-living, mobile ciliate. Here, we report on the ecology of a symbiosis
between a colonial, sedentary species of the genus Zoothamnium (Ciliophora,
Peritrichida) Z. niveum (HEMPRIC&H EHRENBER1G8,3 1) and sulfur-oxidizing
- -
chemolithoautotrophic bacteria. Zoothamnium niveurn was described more than
150 years ago. Although the original authors paid tribute to the conspicuous white
colour of their find by naming it ‘niveum = snowy’, they failed to recognize that
the colour was due to a complete coat of bacteria on the surface of the colony,
covering all but the most basal part of the stalk. The redescription by BAUER-
NEBELSICeKt al. (1996a) showed that terminal zooids and microzooids are covered
by coccoid bacteria, whereas the stalk, the branches and the macrozooids bear rod-
shaped microbes. A complete series of intermediate shapes between those bacteria
covering the branches and those attached to the microzooids suggest that they are
morphotypes of the same bacterial species.
Colour, ultrastructure and the presence of the C02-fixing enzyme of the Calvin
cycle, ribulose- I ,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) (H. FELBECK,
pers. comm.), indicate that the bacteria are sulfur-oxidizing chemolithoautotrophs.
The only bacteria detected so far in food vacuoles within the ciliates (TEM sections)
show the typical ultrastructure of sulfur bacteria and appear to be identical to
those growing on the pellicle of their host. This suggests that the symbionts are
ingested by the microzooids and most likely play an important role in the nutrition
of the ciliates (BAUER-NEBELSIeCt Kal ., 1996b).
Zoorhamniuni niueum has so far been found in the Red Sea (HEMPRIC&H
EHRENBERGI8, 3 1; BAUER-NEBELSIeCt Ka l., 1996a) and the Caribbean (BAUER-
NEBELSICeKt al., 1996a). In the Caribbean it is found growing in groups on
mangrove peat along the banks of tidal channels and ponds. In this study we
describe the ecology of a population living at Twin Cays, a mangrove island of the
Belize Barrier Reef system, and report on the occurrence of this microbe/ciliate
association at other locations in the area.
1. Sampling locality
Twin Cays (Fig. I) is a mangrove island located 3.5 km landwards of Carrie Bow Cay, a small island
on the reef edge of the Belize Barrier Reef off Dangriga, Belize. where a laboratory of the Caribbean
Coral Reef Ecosystem program of the National Museum of Natural History (Washington. DC) is
located (for a description of the area see RUTZLER& MACINTYRK19,8 2). Twin Cays is bisected by a
tidal channel cut into Red Mangrove (Rhi:ophoro munyle) peat with vertical to overhanging walls (Fig.
2) extending in some places down to 2 in depth. Stilt roots of Red Mangroves hang down into the
channel and are covered by a remarkable diversity of algae and sedentary animals (RUTZLER& FELLER,
1996). The peat walls in back of the curtain of hanging stilt roots are covered by a dense microbial mat
and in places by sponges and ascidians. The peat surface is highly structured with depressions and
holes, and in some places is deeply undercut. All quantitative data come from the walls of the main
tidal channel close to its north end, where most of the experimental animals were also collected. Other
collecting sites are similar mangrove islands in the vicinity (Fig. I).
Observations and experiments reported in this paper were made during repeated visits of 3 weeks
each during February to June in the years 1992-1997.

Ciliate-bacteria symbiosis 23 1
'I
l4m 4 .
0
Hopkins
1 2m
Twin Cays
PD
Blue Ground
Range f ; 3 South Water Cay
Mi?., Came Bow Cay
.F' a
Curlew Bank
B
Jonathan Point
ii,
False Point
i2-Ud-I
5 krn
Fig. 1. Map of the vicinity of Twin Cays in the Belize barrier reef system. Sites where Zoothamnium
niueum has been found are indicated by arrow heads.
2. Methods
Density was determined using a 50 x 50 cm frame divided in 25 squares of 100 cm2 each and an
underwater magnifying glass. Roughness of the peat surface was measured as the distance from the
grid points of the frame to the surface of the peat wall. Likewise, the distance between those surfaces
where ciliate groups were found and the plane of the frame was determined.
In order to estimate group life-span, groups were marked with small flags and visited daily over a
period of 3 weeks.
For the micro-electrode profiles, peat blocks that were at least 30 cm deep and fitted tightly into a 10
litre bucket were cut from the peat wall with a machete, inserted into the bucket and sealed with a lid
under water. Thus, blocks could be transported into the laboratory at Carrie Bow Cay without
disturbing the microbial mat on the surface. Blocks were kept in flowing seawater between measure-
ments. Sulfide and oxygen profiles next to and away from colony groups were measured with a combined
needle electrode (VISSCHEeRr al., 1991) under stagnant and flowing water conditions (0.5-5 cm.s-')
within 24 h after collection. Sulfide concentrations in the pore water deeper than 5 cm in the peat were
determined from water samples collected in siru by syringes and analyzed photometrically with a
modification of the CLINEm ethod (CLINE, 1969). Pore water sulfide concentrations measured with the

232 On,B RIGH&T SCHIEMER
Fig. 2. Peat wall along the main tidal channel at Twin Cays, Belize. Colonies of Zoothamnium niueum
can be seen on and around the white patch of sulfur bacteria in the centre ( x 0.3).
Fig. 3. Zoothamnium niveum. Large group on mangrove peat (x 1.7).

Ciliate-bacteria symbiosis 233
electrode in the layer 10 mm below the peat surface were within 10% of those determined photo-
metrically in samples from the same block.
Animals for oxygen uptake measurements were collected by cutting out fist-sized peat blocks with a
knife and transferred in sealed containers to the laboratory, where the respiration of whole colonies
was measured using stoppered Cartesian divers (KLEKOWSK19I7, 1, SCHEMER er al., 1990). Colonies
were repeatedly rinsed in filtered seawater prior to introducing them into the diver in air-saturated
water. This prevents sulfidic water from being transferred with the experimental animals. All measure-
ments were taken at 28T, which was close to the temperature in the field.
Free-flow water movement along the channel walls was measured by timing dye (Fluorescin) markers
along a measured distance. Additional current measurements were obtained from J. HAVENHAN(Dp ers.
comm.). Video recordings of the colonies in the laboratory were made with a Philips LDH 0640 CCD
color camera; photos were taken with a Nikon EM, equipped with a Micro-NIKKOR 55 mm lens,
bellows and ring flash using Kodachrome 64 film.
Results
1. Distribution
Zoothumnium niueum was found along both banks of the main tidal channel (‘Main
Channel’) at Twin Cays. The primary collecting and experimental sites were north
of the dock on the channel’s west side and between the entrance to ‘Turtle Pond’
and ‘Cassiopeia Cove’ on the east side. In addition, Z. niveum colonies occurred
practically everywhere where vertical or overhanging peat walls exist in nearby
mangrove cays, such as Tobacco Range to the North and Blue Ground Range and
Pelican Cays to the South of Twin Cays (Fig. 1). Especially conspicuous popu-
lations were found in two locations at the Pelican Cays, the undercuts in the double
lagoon at Manatee Cay and a small cove at Northwest Cay.
Zoothumnium niueum occurs in groups (Fig. 3) which may contain more than
100 colonies (max. = 127, mean = 26 & 17 SD, n = 34) from approximately 30 cm
below mean low water level down to where the peat walls disappear in the soft
sediment of the channel bottom in less than 2 m depth. The distribution of groups
is random on a 100 cm2 scale (mean = 0.48f0.62, n = 150), but strongly aggre-
gated on a m2 scale (mean = 46 f 20.8, n = 6). Groups of colonies do not prefer
depressions in the peat, as we originally assumed. They are, however, pre-
dominantly found at sites where the microbial surface mat consisting of microscopic
algae, cyanobacteria (Oscillutoriu, Spirulinu) and filamentous sulfur bacteria
(Beggiutou) has been disturbed. Most conspicuous are groups around holes in the
peat where mangrove rootlets had rotten and fallen out (Fig. 4). Purple and white
sulfur bacteria in many cases form conspicuous mats around these holes (Fig. 5).
On the average there were about 1200 colonies per m2.
Small groups with only a few colonies contained either only small colonies
or predominantly large colonies often showing signs of deterioration (loss of
microzooids on lower branches, dense overgrowth by microbes on the lower stalk)
(Fig. 6); larger groups consisted of colonies of all sizes.
Based on the disappearance rate of marked groups (Fig. 7) a group life-time of
cu. 20 days was estimated, assuming that groups were randomly marked and were
at least 4 days old on the marking date which is the time required for a full grown
colony to develop (M. BRIGHTJ,. On,u npubl. obs.).

234 Om,B RIGHT& SCHIEMER
-
Fig. 4. Zoothumnium niveum. Colonies surrounding a hole in the peat. The small white dots are
VorticeNu-like solitary peritrichs, which are also covered by white bacteria ( x 2).
Fig. 5. Site where a mangrove root has rotted and fallen out. The remainder of the root epidermis is
covered by purple bacteria and filamentous white sulfur bacteria. Zoofhumnium niveum colonies are
visible on the left ( x 2).

235
Ciliate-bacteria symbiosi!.
Fig. 6. SEM of thc stalk and several microzooids of a contracted colony of Zoohmniurrt riir4wr~T. hc
stalk is overgrown by whitc lilamcntous bavlena. while ccmoid syrnbiunls cover thc micromaids.
time (days)
Fig. 7. Uisapparance ot' marked groups ofcolonies. The regression linc intcrsects thc x-iixis ilr 16.9
days. Adding 4 days to allow for the groups to contain fully grown colonies yiclds an average life
expcctency of a group of 2 I dnys.

236 OTT,B RIGH&T SCHIEMER
2. Habitat characteristics
Sulphide concentrations in pore water from depths > 5 cm below the peat surface
ranged up to 1.4 mM, whereas in water samples from the channel no sulfide was
detectable even when taken with a syringe close to the peat surface.
Microelectrode profiles revealed extremely sharp gradients of both sulfide and
oxygen at the peat surface (Fig. 8), with oxygen disappearing and sulfide appearing
in a 3 mm thick boundary layer. In areas without ciliate colonies the shape of the
gradient curves was rather insensitive to water movement over the peat surface
and little sulfide was detectable 2 mm above the peat surface. Close to Zoothamnium
groups, however, sulfide concentrations in the 2-4 mm layer were significantly
higher in profiles under stagnant conditions compared to those at a free flow
velocity of 0.5-5 cms', which is in the range of the velocities measured in the
field.
oxygen [prnol . r'] oxygen [prnol . I-']
0 4 8 12 16 10 0 4 8 12 I@ 20
-
10
8 -
II-
7-
-
4-
cu .) 1-
E
g -2-
c
9 -3-
4-
51
-6-
5 4-
-
-7
d -
4-
.10 -
-
I I I I I I I I I I I
o loo 200 300 40 too o loo zoo aw 400 m3
sulfide [prnol . I-'] sulfide [prnol . r']
Fig. 8. Profiles of oxygen and HS- across the surface of mangrove peat measured with a combined
needle electrode: (a) profiles through the surface without ciliates; (b) profiles at sites with groups of
Zoofharnniurn niueurn colonies. Error bars are standard deviations from the mean of several measure-
ments (shown only to one side of the profile for clarity). Sulfide profiles were measured under stagnant
conditions (empty circles) or flow over the surface (filled circles). All oxygen profiles (asterisks) were
taken under stagnant conditions.

Ciliate-bacteria symbiosis 237
3. Behaviour and metabolism
The colonies expand and contract, measuring up to 15 mm in height when expanded
and less than 1 mm when contracted. Analysis of video recordings showed that
colonies spend more time expanded with practically all zooids in contact with the
oxic, non- or low-sulfidic water of the channel. Intervals between contractions
typically range from 5 to 30 s. Contraction takes less than the time between video
frames (1/24th of a second) and brings the colony into the anoxic and sulfidic
boundary layer. Colonies usually remain contracted for less than 1 s and then
expand again, which takes 1 to 3 s.
Freshly collected colonies which were introduced in the Cartesian diver within
15 min after removal from the habitat showed elevated rates of oxygen consump-
tion. These rates decreased rapidly within the first four hours to 140-180 nl
02.mm-2c olony surfaceah-', a level sustained over at least 24 h. When colonies
which had been maintained in normoxic seawater for 24 h were subsequently
incubated in 100 pM sulfide for up to 3 h, they showed a restoration of higher
oxygen uptake rates followed by a subsequent decrease (Fig. 9).
sulfide incubation
6 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 '
hours after collection
Fig. 9. Zoorhamnium niveum. Hourly rates of oxygen uptake of colonies with symbionts measured in
stoppered Cartesian divers. Rates are given per unit surface area, which is proportional to symbiont
mass. The x-axis shows time after removal of the colonies from the peat. Colonies were introduced into
the divers within 15 minutes after collection. Colonies used for the sulfide incubation (n = 5) were not
the same as those used for the oxygen uptake determination of freshly collected material (n = 6), but
had been removed from the peat and maintained in normoxic seawater for at least 24 h. Error bars
indicate standard deviations.

238
Discussion
Zoofhutnriiirrnn iz3eimi inhabits the spatially narrowest sulfide/oxygen gradient of all
symbioses based on chemoautotrophic sulfur-oxidizing bacteria. Depending on the
state of contraction or expansion the colonies are bathed in seawater containing no
oxygen and sulfide up to 250 pM,o r in normoxic sulfide-free seawater. The transition
between the two media is rapid especially during contraction. which proceeds at a
speed of 25 cm-s-'. Although colony expansion takes only about 1-3 s it is 25 to
-
80 times slower (0.3-1 cm s-'). Calculating REYNOLDnSu mbers (R = u 1 * I!-' with
1 = 0.01 m, v = m'as-') for both contraction and expansion suggests that
contraction at R = 2500 effectively exchanges the water around the colony, whereas
during expansion (R = 30 - 100) sulfidic water probably adheres to the surface of
the ciliate due to viscous forces and is carried through the boundary layer, thus
prolonging the time for uptake of sulfide by the bacteria. In sulfur symbioses the
major problem of the animal host is to supply the sulfur-oxidizing symbionts with
both sulfide and oxygen, which are mutually exclusive under most circumstances
(Fig. 10). Rapid turbulent mixing at hot vents delivers sulfide and oxygen to the
plume of vent vestimentifera; cold seep vestimentifera probably 'mine' sulfide in
deeper sediment layers with root-like posterior processes (SCOTT8 i FISHER1.9 95);
bivalves such as Ca1vpro.qenu (ARP ef al., 1984; see also review in CHILDRES&S
FISHER19, 92) and Thyasira (DANDO& SOUTHWARD19,8 6) use their foot to obtain
sulfide from lava cracks or deep sediment, respectively, while pumping oxygenated
water across their gills. Nematodes and oligochaetes migrate (OTTe t al., 1991; GIERE
ef a/., 1991) over a distance of several cm to dm between sulfidic layers deep in the
sediment and the oxic surface. The extreme gradient at the peat surface allows
Zoorharnnium niceunz to uncouple sulfide and oxygen uptake in space and time over
a few mm and within seconds. The steep drop of oxygen uptake under oxic conditions
indicates that there is a store of reduced sulfur compounds which is available to the
bacteria and which is rapidly exhausted but may be replenished, as shown by the
rise in respiration rate following sulfide incubation.
The occurrence at disturbed sites on the peat surface together with the short life
time of such aggregations suggest that Z. niveum is an opportunist which is able to
colonize and exploit sites of high sulfide flux to the water. The sensitivity of the
sulfide profile to water movement indicates that the flux there is under physical
control with rapid leakage of sulfide from the peat. In contrast, sulfide flux to the
water appears low and insensitive to flow along the undisturbed surface. Sulfide
diffusing from deeper layers of the peat is probably either oxidized by the oxygen
produced by cyanobacteria or taken up and eventually oxidized by sulfur bacteria
in the undisturbed microbial mat and thus is under biological control (Fig. 1 I).
Groups consisting of a few small colonies are probably early stages of colon-
ization of a newly formed hydrogen sulfide 'minivent'. Colonization occurs through
a dispersal stage (swarmer, macrozooid) ( BAUER-NEBELSIeCt Ka/ ., 19964. Larger
groups consisting of colonies of all sizes represent a later, 'mature' stage of the
sulfide point source. In time the microbial mat which covers the peat surface as the
'climax' stage re-establishes itself, reducing the sulfide flux and thus rendering the
site unsuitable for the ciliates. Those small groups mostly consisting of large and
degenerating colonies are a late stage where new recruitment of swarmers has
ceased (Fig. 12). The high growth rates, short life span and the extraordinary

Ciliate-bacteria symbiosis 239
Fig. 10. The different strategies of hosts to supply their symbiotic sulfur-oxidizing chemoautotrophic
bacteria with sulfide and oxygen. From top to bottom the gradient becomes more spatially defined and
the role of the host in creating the proper environment decreases. (a) Vestimentiferan tube-worms at
deep-sea hot vents are exposed to a turbulent mixture of sulfidic and oxic water. The supply rate of sulfide
and oxygen to the internal symbionts is under tight bio-molecular control by the host haemoglobin. (b)
Bivalves procure the necessary chemical compounds using special organs such as siphons, gills or foot
to pump or mine sulfide and/or oxygen (in part the transport process is also dependent on blood
compounds). (c) Interstitial meiofauna (gutless oligochaetes, stilbonematid nematodes) migrate through
the chemocline of marine sediments and stay for some time alternately in sulfidic or oxic sediment
layers. (d) The narrow gradient along its colony allows Zoofhamnium niueum to rapidly change between
high sulfide concentration and oxygen saturation without even having to resort to locomotion (sym-
bionts darkest shading, sulfidic water - medium shading, no oxygenlno-sulfide zone - light shading,
~
oxygenated water - white).

240 OTT. BRIGH&T SCHlEMER
Fig. I I. Model of the flux of sulfide at sites with (a) intact and (b) disturbed microbial mat on the peat
surface. In (a) the profiles of sulfide concentrations during stagnant (thick line) and flow (thin line)
conditions .do not differ much where the microbial mat keeps sulfide flux under biological control. In
(b) sulfide flows freely creating a several mm thick sulfidic boundary layer under stagnant conditions
which is markedly reduced by water flow. Expanded Zoorhamnium colonies (right) extend into oxygen
containing water with little or no sulfide. Contracted colonies (left) are completely immersed in sulfidic
water. Dark arrows indicate magnitude of sulfide flux, white arrow syrnbolises current flow over the
peat surface.
habitat locating abilities of the swarmers (M. BRIGHTJ, . OTT,u npubl. obs.) are
consistent with the life style of a pioneer in gap dynamics. The promotion of an
opportunistic, fugitive life style through a symbiosis is contrary to the paradigm
that symbioses are characteristic of climax stages (ODUM1, 969).
The genus Zoothamnium contains approximately 60 described species from many
aquatic habitats, both freshwater and marine, benthic and pelagic. In a number of
cases, associations with microorganisms have been reported, among others with
cyanobacteria or bacteria - some in connection with occurrence in sulfidic habitats
(see review in BAUER-NEBELSeItC aKl. , 1996a). A possible symbiosis has been
suggested by LAVAL-BUT&O RASSOULZADEGA(N1 9 88) for the association of Z.
pelagicum with cyanobacteria.
Zoothamnium niveum is another case of ectosymbiosis which provides us with a
glimpse of how symbioses may have evolved. The special properties of the surface
of Peritrichida and especially members of the genus Zoothamnium permit epigrowth
by microorganisms - or rather the ciliates cannot prevent fouling, which appears
to limit age and size of the colonies. Attaining selective control over the fouling
organisms is certainly an advantage. In 2. niveum such control appears to exist at

Ciliate-bacteria symbiosis 24 1
Fig. 12. Sequence of (a) colonization of a disturbed site, (b) maturation of a group and (c) senescence
of the sulfide point source. During colonization the group comprises only young colonies and many
freshly settled swarmers; a mature group shows a mixture of fully grown colonies already releasing
swanners and some young colonies; senescent groups are made up by mature colonies, many of which
have already lost a large number of microzooids and show overgrowth by a variety of bacteria.
least in young parts of the colony and may be one of the reasons why such a large
size can be attained. Whereas the main axis, the branches and the zooids are
covered by a presumably monospecific coat of rod-shaped to coccoid bacteria
(BAUER-NEBELSeIt CaKl., 1996a), the basal portions of the stalk in fully grown
colonies are overgrown by a variety of filamentous microorganisms. With onset of
senescence, larger parts of the colony base lose the zooids and are subsequently
fouled.
The occurrence of the ciliate close to sulfide gradients allowed sulfur-oxidizing
bacteria to become members of the fouling community. The special trait to ex-
change surrounding water by rapid contraction of stalks - which is common in
Peritrichida - may have led to selection for those bacteria which alternately need
sulfide and oxygen by enhancing their growth. Ample nutrition from the ‘gardened’
bacteria provides a positive feedback allowing rapid growth of the ciliate. SCHIEMER
et al. (1990) proposed a similar sequence for the evolution of an ectosymbiosis in
the marine nematode subfamily Stilbonematinae. This taxon consists of several
genera possessing a surface coat of ectosymbiotic bacteria within the family Desmo-
doridae, which is characterized by the frequent occurrence of fouling organisms
(bacteria, diatoms, suctorians) on their cuticle (OTT,1 996).

242 OTT, BRIGHT & SCHlEMER
Summary
The colonial ciliate Zoorhamnium nioeum lives on mangrove peat in densities of
more than 1000 colonies.m-2. Groups of a few to more than 100 colonies cluster
around disturbed sites on the peat surface, which act as point sources for sulfide.
Colonies retract and expand through a sharp gradient of water chemistry, where
oxygen disappears and sulfide is present in concentrations of 25&300 pM within
a 3 4 m m thick boundary layer on the peat surface. In this way the ciliate host
supplies its ectosymbiotic chemoautotrophic bacteria alternately with sulfide and
oxygen. A single point source for sulfide supports growth of the ciliate and its
symbionts for about 3 weeks. At this point the microbial mat of the adjoining,
undisturbed peat surface regrows over the disturbed site and reduces sulfide flux.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the FFWF (Austria) 9189 BIO (J. OTT, principal investigator)
and the CCRE program of the NMNH (Washington, DC). We thank KLAUSR OTZLER( NMNH) for
continued support of our work at Carrie Bow Cay, IVAN GOODBOD(JYam aica) for directing our
attention to small pretty white things and ALEXANDEBRO CHDANSKfoYr the video sequences. This paper
is contribution nr. 554 of the CCRE program.
References
ARP,A . J., J. J. CHILDRES&S C. R. FISHER1, 984: Metabolic and blood gas transport characteristics of
the hydrothermal vent bivalve, Calyptogena magnifica. Physiol. Zool., 57: 648-662.
BAUER-NEBELSICK, M., c. F. BARDEL&E J. A. Om, 1996a: Redescription of Zoothamnium niwum
(HEMPRICH & EHRENBERGI8. 3 I) EHRENBERG18. 38 (Oligohymenophora, Peritrichida), a ciliate
with ectosymbiotic, chemoautotrophic bacteria. Europ. J. Protistol., 32: 18-30.
--, C. F. BARDELEJ&. A . On, 1996b: Electron microscopic studies on Zoofhamniumn izwrn (HEMPRICII
& EHRENBERG1,8 31) EHRENBERG18,3 8 (Oligohymenophora, Peritrichida), a ciliate with ecto-
symbiotic, chemoautotrophic bacteria. Europ. J. Protistol., 32 202-21 5.
CAVANAUGCH., M., 1985: Symbioses of chemoautotrophic bacteria and marine invertebrates from
hydrothermal vents and reducing sediments. Bull. Biol. SOC.W ash., 6 373-388.
--, 1994: Microbial Symbiosis: Patterns of Diversity in the Marine Environment. Am. Zool., 34: 79-
89.
CHILDRESJS., J . & C. R. FISHER19,9 2: The biology of hydrothermal vent animals: physiology, biochem-
istry, and autotrophic symbioses. Oceanogr. Mar. Biol. Annu. Rev., 30: 337-441.
CLINEJ,. D., 1969: Spectrophotometric determination of hydrogen sulfide in natural waters. Limnol.
Oceanogr.. 14: 454-458.
DANDOP, . R. &A. J. SOUTHWAR1D9,8 6: Chemoautotrophy in bivalve molluscs of the genus Thyusira.
J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. U.K.. 66: 91 5-929.
FELUECHK.,, J. CHILDRES&S G. N. SOMERO19,8 1: Calvin-Benson cycle and sulfide oxidation enzymes
in animals from sulfide-rich habitats. Nature, 293: 291.
FENCHETL. ,& J. FINLAY19,8 9: Kentrophoros: a mouthless ciliate with a symhotic kitchen garden.
Ophelia, Jo: 75-93.
FISHER C. R., 1996: Ecophysiology of primary production at deep-sea vents and seeps. In: F. UIBLEIN,
J. A. OTT& M. STACHUWITSC(EHd s.), Deep sea and extreme shallow-water habitats: affinities and
adaptations. Biosyst. Ecol. Ser., 11: 313-336.
GIEREO, ., I98 1: The gutless marine oligochaete Phallodrilus leukodermarus. Structural studies on an
aberrant tubificid associated with bacteria. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 5: 353-357.
--, 1996: Bacterial endosymbioses in marine littoral worms. In: F. UIBLEINJ. . A. OTT & M.
STACHOWITSC(EHd s.), Deep sea and extreme shallow-water habitats: affinities and adaptations.
Biosyst. Ecol. Ser., 11: 353-367.

Ciliate-bacteria symbiosis 243
--, N. M. CONWAYG, . GASTROCK& C. SCHMIDT1, 991: 'Regulation' of gutless annelid ecology by
endosymbiotic bacteria. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 68: 287-299.
HEMPRICHF,. W. & C. G. EHRENBERG18,3 1: Symbolae physicae. Evertebrata. I. Phytozoa. Abhand-
lungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin.
KLEKOWSKRI,. Z., 1971 : Cartesian diver respirometry for aquatic animals. Polskie Arch. Hydrobiol.,
18: 93- 114.
LAVAL-PEUTMO,. & F. RASSOULZADEGA19N8,8 : Autofluorescence of marine planktonic Oligotrichina
and other ciliates. Hydrobiologia, 159(1): 99-1 10.
MENONJ,. G. & A. J. ARP, 1993: The integument of the marine echiuran worm Urechis caupo. Biol.
Bull.. 185: 44&454.
NELSOND, . C. & C. R. FISHER19, 95: Chemoautotrophic and methanotrophic endosymbiotic bacteria
at deep-sea vents and seeps. In: D. M. KARL( Ed.), The Microbiology of Deep-sea Hydrothermal
Vents. CRC Press, Boca Raton, USA: 125-167.
ODUM,E . P.. 1969: The strategy of ecosystem development. Science, 164: 262-270.
OESCHGERR,. & R. SCHMALJOHAN19N8,8 : Association of various types of epibacteria with Halycryprus
spinulosus (Priapulida). Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 48: 285-293.
OTT,J . A,. 1996: Sulfide ectosymbioses in shallow marine habitats. In: F. UIBLEINJ,. A. O n& M.
STACHOWITSC(EHd s.), Deep sea and extreme shallow-water habitats: affinities and adaptations.
Biosyst. Ecol. Ser.. 11: 369-382.
-- & R. NOVAK,1 989: Living at an interface: meiofauna at the oxygen/sulfide boundary of marine
sediments. In: J. S. RYLAND& P. A. TYLER(E ds.), Reproduction genetics and distributions of
marine organisms. Olsen & Olsen. Fredensborg: 41 5422.
--, R. NOVAKF, . SCHIEMERU,. HENTSCHELM. . NEBELSIC&K M. POLZ, 1991: Tackling the sulfide
gradient: a novel strategy involving marine nematodes and chemoautotrophic ectosymbionts.
P.S.Z.N.1: Marine Ecology, 12 261-279.
--, G. RIEGERR, . RIEGER& F. ENDERES1,9 82: New mouthless interstitial worms from the sulfide
system: Symbiosis with prokaryotes. P.S.Z.N.1: Marine Ecology, 3(4): 313-333.
RUTZLERK, . & I. C. FELLER19,9 6: Caribbean mangrove swamps. Sci. Am., 274/3 94-99.
-- & 1. G. MACINTYRE19, 82: The habitat distribution and community structure of the barrier reef
complex at Carrie Bow Cay, Belize. In: K. RUTZLER& 1. G. MACINTYR(EE ds.). The Atlantic
barrier reef ecosystem at Carrie Bow Cay, Belize, 1. Structure and Communities. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, DC. Smithson. Contrib. Mar. Sci., 129 45.
SCHIEMERF,. , R. NOVAK& J. OTT, 1990: Metabolic studies on thiobiotic free-living nematodes and
their symbiotic microorganisms. Mar. Biol., 106: 129-137.
SCOTTK, . & C. R. FISHER19, 95: Physiological ecology of sulfide metabolism in hydrothermal vent and
cold seep vesicomyid clams and vestimentiferan tube worms. Am. Zool., 35: 102-1 11.
SOUTHWARAD., J., E. C. SOUTHWARDP., R. DANDO,R . L. BARRETT& R. LING, 1986: Chemoau-
totrophic function of bacterial symbionts in small Pogonophora. J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. U.K., 66:
415437.
STEINJ. . L., S. C. CARYR, . R. HESSLERS, . OHTA,R . D. VETTERJ. . J. CHILDRE&S H. FELBEC1K98, 8:
Chemoautotrophic symbiosis in a hydrothermal vent gastropod. Biol. Bull., 174 373-378.
TAMARAA.., C. DE RIDDERJ,. G. KUENEN& L. A. ROBERTSON19, 93: Sulfide-oxidizing bacteria in the
burrowing echinoid, Echinocardium cordarum (Echinodermata). Mar. Biol.. 115: 179-1 85.
TUNNICLIFFVE.,, 1991 : The biology of hydrothermal vents: ecology and evolution. Oceanogr. Mar.
Biol. Annu. Rev., 29 319407.
--, 1992: The nature and origin of the modern hydrothermal vent fauna. Palaios, 7: 338-350.
VISSCHERP,. T., J. BEUKEM&A H. V. GEMERDE1N99,1 : In siru characterization of sediments: measure-
ment of oxygen and sulfide profiles with a novel combined needle electrode. Limnol. Oceanogr.,
36 1476-1480.

