I
MARINE ECOLOGY - PROGRESS SERIES
Vol. 5: 165-184, 1981 Published May 31
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser.
-
- - -. - -
Physiological Ecology of the Deposit-Feeding Sea
Star Ctenodiscus crispatus: Ciliated Surfaces and
Animal-Sediment Interactions
J. Malcolm Shick, Kelly C. Edwards and John H. Dearborn
Department of Zoology, University of Maine, Orono, Maine 04469, USA
ABSTRACT: Ctenodiscus crlspat~lsi s a non-selective deposit feeder on organically-rich (9.7 O/o of
sediment dry weight) oxidized clayey-silt in the Gulf of Maine, USA. The mud star's lack of selectivity
is attributed to the thorough mix~nga nd very fine particle size of the habitat sediment, in which 90 % of
the particlt.5 are less than 4 @ (62.5 lim) in diameter These sediments are easily disturbed and present
problems in maintaining unimpa~redg as-exchange surfaces. C. crispatus has adapted to this by
establiah~nga temporary burrow and using its extensible epiproctal cone to nlalntaln connectron w~th
the water column. The burrow is irrigated by ciliary currents which, based on laboratory observations
of burrowed mud stars, provide a continuous respiratory flow with a min~mumo f disturbance to the
flocculent surface sediment. Particles incidentally drawn into the burrow are trapped in cleansing
mucus which is ingested, likely accounting for the enrichment in organlc content of stomach contents
relative to habitat sediment. The low convection requirement (1.69 1 of water pumped per m1 of 0,
removed from the current) reflects the respiratory, as opposed to nutnt~onaln, dture of the current. Thc
cribriforrn organs not only create the driving force for the lcspiratory current, but themselves provide a
large surface area (11 cm' in a 1.5 g individual), and ddditionally are r~chlys upplied with microvilli.
Both the extensive ciliation and anatom~caal rranger~lcnotf the cribriform lamellaeeliminate unstirred
I<~yrrast tht.11 ,lirfc~c.c>a nd account for low K, values tor tl~zzolveda mino acid uptake, which despite a
low concentrat~on ( LIL.~I.~(J4~. 4 pM) in ~nterstitialw ater rn the hdbitat prov~dea net income in the
~~ninlalc'.sn crgv butlyel. The biology of the eurybathic C, crispatus IS d~scussedw rth relerence to that 01
thc rr Ik,tcd Porc~,llanasteritiaea, group of truly deep-sea d~posifte edlng astero~ds.
INTRODUCTION Lieberkind, 1935; Madsen, 1961a; Turner and Dear-
born, 1972). Gislen (1924) observed the general pat-
The mud star Ctenodiscus crispatus (Retzius] is a terns of ciliation of Ctenodiscus crispatus. Sperm mor-
small, circumboreal goniopectinid asteroid common on phology has been examined by Summers et al. (1975).
level mud bottoms throughout the Gulf of Maine. Gen- Sterols in this asteroid have been characterized by
erally considered to be a boreo-arctic species, the mud Grossert et al. (1973). Turner (1976) noted the effect of
star is also found as far south as Cape Hatteras on the the ovarian hormone l-methyladenine on spawning in
eastern North American coast (Verrill, 1914),a nd south this species. Shick (1976) described the respiratory and
to Panama on the western coast (Grainger, 1966). The behavioral responses of this infaunal sea star to
bathymetric range is from 2 to at least 1900 m (Alton, hypoxia and hydrogen sulfide. Finally, reproduction
1966; Grainger, 1966), and most specimens are found and population genetics of C. crispatus have been
at depths of 50-600 m (Mortensen, 1927). More south- studied by Shick et al. (in press).
ern populat~onso ccur in deeper water than northern Other than the general observation that the mud star
populations. The mud star may be locally abundant is an infaunal deposit feeder, little is known of its
and form a significant portion of the macroinvertebrate feeding biology. On the basis of a simple experiment
biomass in clayey silt substrates. carr~edo ut during his studies on the ciliation of various
Previous work on the mud star has concentrated on echinoderms, Gislen (1924) concluded that Ctenodis-
anatomy and morphology (Fisher, 1911; Verrill, 1914; cus crispatus is probably a ciliary-mucoid feeder on
O Inter-Research!Printed in F. R. Germany

166 Mar Ecol. Prog. Ser. 5: 165-184, 1981
sediment particles. He believed that the ciliated lamel- suction corers made from glass or plastic hypodermic
lae on the cribriform organs, which occur between all syringes and were maintained on ice during transport
marginal plates in this species, are used as particle to the laboratory. Core lengths were generally about
sorting devices in addition to producing respiratory 5 cm.
currents. Later authors have generally relied on Gis- Specimens were usually taken in a Blake (beam-
16n's (1924) account (e.g. Hyrnan. 1955; Madsen, type) trawl containing a 3 mm stretch-mesh bag liner
1961a). In its feeding habits and general marphology Juvenile sea stars were obtained by gently sieving the
C. crispatus is similar to the deep-sea Porcellanas- sediment retained by the trawl through a 1 mm mesh.
teridae, and Madsen (1961a) implies that it may repre- Adults and juvenkles for physiological studies were
sent an evolutionary step in their development. Earlier immediately placed in sea water at O0 - 2 OC for trans-
workers, in fact, placed Ctenodiscus in the Porcel- port to the laboratory, where they were maintained in
lanasteridae (see Mortensen, 1927) although Spencer recirculating seawater at seasonal habitat tempera-
and Wright (1966) accept its placement in the tures. A few mud stars were captured in grab samples.
Goniopectinidae. These specimens were important because direct com-
The funct~onsof the cribriform organs and associated parisons could be made between ingested sediment
channels, cilia, tube feet, and mucus in Ctenodiscus removed from the sea stars and the environmenta'l
crispatus have not been examined in sufficient detail sediment immediately surrounding them. Sediment
to explain the mechanisms of feeding and burrow from mud star stomachs was extruded by applying
irrigation in this animal which lives in unstable sedi- gentle pressure on the aboral surface.
ments of very fine particle size. The functional mor-
phology of C. crispatus is of interest because of its
manipulation of sediment, both physically and chemi- Sediment Analyses
cally. Organism-sediment relations in fine-grained
deposits have been reviewed by Rhoads (1974) who Some cores were analyzed as entire samples. Others
emphasized the importance of activities of mud-dwell- were split lengthwise to provide subsamples for sepa-
ing animals in modifying the physical and chemical rate determinations of organlc content and particle
properties of the sea floor. Because of the close size. A few cores were divided into several contiguous
similarities in morphology and feeding habits between depth horizons of 0-2 mm, 2-7 mm, 7-12 mm, and
C. crispatus and the porcellanasterids, many aspects of 12-22 mm, to check for variation with sediment depth.
the biology of the mud star may be applicable to these Organic content and particle slze distribution were
deep-sea forms as well. determined for sediment from both the environment
and the stomachs of selected mud stars. Weights for all
procedures were determined to the nearest 10 yg. An
MATERIALS AND METHODS estimate of total organic matter (TOM)w as determined
by loss of weight of dried sedlment on ignition, at
Sample Collections 500 "C for 4 h (Byers et al., 1978). No correction for
carbonate content, which is very low in these sedi-
Numerous specimens of Ctenodiscus crispatus, a ments (L. M. Mayer, pers. comm.),w as made.
total of 112 environmental sediment samples, and 52 Particle size distributions were determined using a
sediment sanlples removed from the cardiac stomachs combrnation of wet sieving and Coulter Counter analy-
of individual sea stars were obtained in the Gull of sis. Each sample was washed through stacked sieves of
Maine, USA, during 13 trips at various seasons from 500, 250, 125, and 75 pn:. Fractions > 75 were
1977 to 1980. The collecting site (43'44'12"N, dried, weighed, and the percentage of total drv sample
69'39'21"W to 43'43'18"N, 69"39'48"W] was located weight calculated. The < 75 Km fraction was analyzed
off Damarlscove Island and The Cuckolds, Maine, with a particle counter (Model TA Coulter Counter)
about 10 km offshore from the mouth of the Damaris- with a 200 pm aperture following the general proce-
cotta River at a depth of 60-76 m. The bottom at the site dures of Sheldon and Parsons (1967).T he 200 pm aper-
was a gently seaward-sloping basin of soft silt and clay ture allows accurate analysis to the 4 pm level. Data
with occasional rock outcrops. Bottom temperatures were transformed from micrometers to @ (phi) units,
ranged from 2.8 "C (28 March 1979) to 9.4 "C (29 the most accepted grade scale in recent sedirnentologi-
November 1977) (see Edwards. 1980 for sampling de- cal work (Folk, 1974). A number of random samples
tails). were examined visually to categorize particle species
Environmental sediments were taken with a Shipek present in each size range.
grab (Holme, 1964). Subsamples of grabs in which the The arcsine transformation test for the equality of
sediment surface was undisturbed were taken with two percentages (Sokal and Rohlf, 1969) was used to

Shlck et a1 Sea star-sedrment ~nleractions 167
compare TOM content between nlud star stomach and to, and rinsed in clean artificial seawater immediat.ely
environmental sediment samples. Particle size dis- before, the experiments Parallel st~~diewse re per-
tribution plots of en\rironniental and asteroid sediment formed in which antlbiot~c-treated juveniles were
samples were prepared using a rnodified computer exposed to uniformly labeled "C-glycine (New Eng-
plotting program for the Calcomp plotter. Analysis of land Nuclear) in 32 X,, S artificial seawater and
differences between various particle size distributions medium glycine concentration was simultaneously
was carried out by discriminant analysis (Sokal and measured by liquid scintillation and fluorometric
Rohlf, 1969) techniques. Neither primary anline nor radioactivity
Oxidation-reduction potential (redox, Eh) profiles levels in control vessels containing no mud stars
were determined with a polished platinum electrode dt changed during 18 h at 8 "C. Finally, the kinetlcs of
5 mm intervals in 50 cc glass syringe cores placed in uptake of "C-glycine by individual juveniles were
seawater aquaria at the prevailing seabed temperature determined using concentrations ranging from 1.9 to
(5 "-8 "C); corrections were made for the calornel elec- 101.3 kih1 in artificial seawater and incubation times of
trode (Orion Research) potential at the experimental 10 min. Specimens were then quickly rinsed in ice-
temperature. cold artificial seawater, blotted dry, weighed, digested
overnight in Protosol tissue solubilizer (New England
Nuclear), and subsequently assayed for total glycine
Electron Microscopy uptake on a Packard Model 3255 liquid scintillation
counter. Corrections for quenching were made using
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmis- internal and external standards. Similar kinetic experi-
sion electron microscopy (TEM) were used to study ments were conducted with I4C-asparate, both in the
morphological details of mud stars. All specimens absence and presence of 100 pM glycine. All uptake
were initially fixed aboard the collecting vessel, either experiments were performed at 8 'C. Additional speci-
in chilled 2.5 O/o phosphate-buffered glutaraldehyde mens wc-rc used to determine the relationship betwt.cn
for 2 h (most SEM specimens) (Sabatini et al., 1963),o r blotted wet and dry weight.
in 2 % glutaraldehyde in 77 % seawdter for 12 h (some
SEM and all TEM specimens) (Holland and Jesperson,
1973). All specimens were subsequently washed and Oxygen Uptake
stored in cold 0.1 M Sorenson's phosphate buffer Sec-
ondary flxation of all material was in cold 2 % osmium Rat.es of oxygen uptake by intact mud stars were
tetroxide. The best SEM results were obtained on monitored continuously in closed vessels described in
speclinens dehydrated in ethanol series, critical point Shick (1976) at 5 " or 8 "C using Yellow Springs Instru-
dried, and coated with a gold/palladium mixture. Full ment Company Models 5720 or 5750 oxygen probes
details are given in Edwards (1980). and a Model 54ARC oxygen meter. Oxygen uptake
rates by some juveniles were measured with an oxygen
microelectrode (Rank Brothers). Sediment collected
Dissolved Primary Amines from the mud stars' habitat was sieved to remove
macrofauna, frozen and thawed to kill other organisms,
Interstitial water was expressed from fresh sediment and then placed in 11 cm diameter glass bowls to a
under N, pressure (25-40 psi) in a stainless steel Milli- depth of 4 cm. Animals were allowed to establish bur-
pore pressure filtration apparatus fitted with acid- rows in these bowls of sediment which were sub-
r~nsedfi lters (0.22 ~u-pIo re size) Totdl primary amine merged in rec~rculatinga quaria at 5OC. Water samples
concentration was determined wlth Fluoi-escamine (50-75 111) taken from distin.ct excurrent channels of
reagent [Roche Diagnostics) in a Turner Model 110 individual mud star burrows using a glass syringe
fluorometer using the methods of North (1975) and fitted with a drawn glass capillary tube and positioned
Stephens (1975).G lycine standards in artificial seawa- with a inici-omanipulator were injected into a
ter (formulation of the Marine Biological Laboratory; Radiometer Copenhagen BMS3 Mk 2 Blood Micro Sys-
Cavanaugh, 1956) were employed. tem (bath temperature regulated at 5OC) connected to a
The uptake of primary amines from 10-15 m1 of PHM71 Mk 2 acid-base analyzer for determination of
interstitial water obtained as above was monitored their oxygen contents. A minimum of five samples was
fluorometrically in juvenile Ctenodiscus crjspatus. All taken during a l-h period in each of seven specimens.
specimens were rinsed of surface sediment and incu- The removal of 0, from the burrow irrigation current
bated in an antibiotic solution (500,000 units penicil- was calculated by subtracting the above values from
lin. 200 mg streptomycin sulfate, and 50 mg chloram- those for incurrent water. The redox profile of undis-
phenicol per liter of artificial seawater) for 24 h prior turbed sediment and of sediment in the same bowl but

Mar Ecol. Prog. Ser 5: 165-184, 1981
immediately adjacent to burrow excurrent channels environmental sediment samples. The organic content
was measured with the platinum electrode positioned of samples from the cardiac stomach of mud stars was
by a micromanipulator. The oxygen partial pressure in significantly higher than from environmental samples
Ctenodiscus crispatus perivisceral fluid was deter- (P = 0,0042).
mined for samples removed by puncturing the aboral
skin and injected into the Blood Micro System.
Particle Size Analysis
RESULTS Particle size analysis of environmental sediments
indicates that the substrate of the study area is fairly
Sediment Organic Content uniform and homogenous in structure, both with
increasing sediment depth and from site to site (Table
Total organic content differed greatly between sedi- 1).T he sedlment is very fine-grained, and silt and clay-
ment derived from mud stars and the environment (Fig. sized particles predominate, averaging 76.2 % and
1). Organic material in sediment from animals aver- 15.8 % of the substrate, respectively. Sand-sized parti-
aged 28.2 % of total sample weight. Environmental cles make up a relatively small proportion of all sam-
sediment averaged 9.7 % organic content by weight. ples, averaging 8.1 % of total sample weight.
The range of mean values for organic content by col- Fecal pellets of marine invertebrates were the most
frequently observed particles in the sand-sized frac-
45 n Sed~mento rganlc content tion. Larger size fractions (< 2 @, > 250 pm) often
contained worm and amphipod tubes, nuculid
o: environment t
I:sea stars bivalves, portions of macroalgae, terrestrial plant
debris and occasionally Foraminifera and large
diatoms. Diatom tests were most abundant in the 2-3 (O
(250-125 pm) size fraction. Occasionally this fraction
also contained disarticulated echinoderm ossicles and
sponge splcules. Organic debris unidentifiable by
light microscopy often formed substantial portions of
samples in all size classes. Meiofaunal organisms were
rarely encountered except for occasional mites and
nematodes, which were generally in the 1-2 @
Percent organic (500-250 pnl) sediment fraction: This may have been
due to our collecting methods since kinorhynchs, mites
Fig. 1. Individual values for organic content of sediment and nematodes are known to be common (S. Tyler,
(percent of dry weight) from all mud star stomachs (N = 52)
pers. comm.).
3nd environmental samples (N = 112) collected by various
methods described in text Individual mineral grains larger than 4 (O units
(62.5 pm) in size were rare in all samples examined
lection date was wider in sediment samples from mud and were essentially absent from size classes > 2 @
stars (20.5 %-43.3 %) than in environmental samples (< 250 pm),a lthough aggregations of smaller particles,
(8.7 '3-10.5 %). The range of individual values (Fig. 1) apparently partially decomposed fecal pellets, were
was 15.05 %-66.9 % for sea stars and 5.3 0/0-13.0 % for occasionally encountered in the 1-2 @ (500-250 pm)
mean
Table 1 Ctenodlscus crispatus. percent occurrence of sand, s~lal nd clay in sea star stomachs, comparable sediment
samples and all environmental samples
Part~cles ize class Sue range Percent occurrence
C. crispatus' Grab samples All environmental
containing mud samples' '
stars '
Sand 0-4 8,1000 -62.5 pm 7.05 8.95 8.05
Silt 4-8 9, 62.5- 3 9 ~{rn 69.05 75.24 76.20
Clay 8 Ca. < 3.9 23.90 15.81 15.75
Samples from same grab
' ' All environmental samples, includ~ngg rabs comparable to particular mud stars

Shick et al.: Sea star-sediment interact~ons 169
Ctenodiscus crispatus usually makes its burrow. Mix-
ing appears complete to this sediment depth.
Sediment from Animals
We were successful in obtaining only 5 grab samples
that were reasonably undisturbed and also contained
undamaged adult mud stars so that direct comparisons
could be made between particle size distributions of
sediment from sea star stomachs and the environmen-
tal sediment in which they were living.
The mean values for the sand, silt, and clay fractions
of these 5 environmental samples vary slightly from
those of the combined environmental sediment sam-
ples for all dates (Table 1).A nalysis by arcsine trans-
Fig. 2. Particle size distribution plots. (a) Sediment from the formation for the equality of two percentages shows
stomach of a mud star (CT1-G4), and 3 sediment cores from the variation is not significant (P > .10) in each case.
the same grab sample, 23 June 1978, (b) Sediment from the
The variation probably stems from the different
stomach of a mud star (CT1-G2), and 3 contiguous sediment
samples taken at various depths from the same grab. AA = number of samples in the 2 groups (14 and 52 respec-
0-2 mm, A = 2-7 mm, B = 7-12 mm, C = 12-22 mm. tively). The smaller sample size for directly compar-
28 March 1979 able samples introduces a greater error into the mean
than does the large sample size for all environmental
size class. In all cases the largest portion of the sample
samples The 5 samples for direct comparison repre-
consisted of mineral and clay particles smaller than
sent different bottom locations as well as three diffe-
4 Q, units (62.5 pm) in size.
rent seasons of the year: summer, fall, and early spring
Particle distribution of the substrate is uniform with
Slight differences in the percentages of sand, silt,
increasing depth throughout the top 2-3 cm of sedi-
and clay size classes occur between sea star and sedi-
ments (Figs 2 and 3), the maximum depth to which
ment samples from the same grab (Fig. 2). The particle
subsamples were analyzed, and the depth at which
size distribution of sediment acquired from animal
sources is finer than sediment from the general envi-
ronment. In either case particles larger than 1 Q (500
pm) were generally biologically derived structures
such as worm tubes and bivalve shells.
Discriminant factor analysis correctly predicted the
classification of a sediment sample as animal or envi-
ronment 89.5 % of the time when the environment and
animal samples from the same grab were analyzed
together. Animal samples were correctly classified
100 O/o of the time, and environmental samples were
correctly classified 85.7 % of the time.
When asteroid samples were compared individually
with sediment samples from the grab in which the mud
stars were captured, discriminant analysis correctly
predicted group classification in 3 of 5 sample sets. The
analysis was unable to separate one sediment core
from animal-derived sediment in each of the 2 remain-
ing samples.
Inspection of the particle size distributions of the five
matched sample sets, two shown in Fig. 2, indicates
Grain size (01 that whenever the analysis is able to separate animal
from sediment samples, the animal sample is consis-
Fig. 3. Particle size distribution plots for 4 contiguous sedi-
tently richer in fine size-class particles than is its
ment samples taken at various depths from the same grab. AA
= 0-2 mm, A = 2-7 mm, B = 7-12 mm, C = 12-22 mm; 28 associated habitat sediment. Each of the cases in which
March 1979 discriminant analysis was unable to distinguish sam-

170 Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser 5: 16.5-184, 1981
ples fro111 each other exhibited animal sed~mentp ro- paxillae. Each paxilla consists of a stout central column
files that were very similar to those in the remaining 3 crowned with a variable number (4-10) of spinelets.
sample sets. Environn~entals ediment profiles in indis- There is no particular pattern of distribution of paxillae
tlnguishable cases were more variable than those in with different numbers of spinclets.
distinguishable cases, and in each set at least one of Because of the flexible nature of the aboral surfacc,
the environmental sediment profiles closely parallels the profile of the sea star is variable, and reflects the
the animal sample. degree to which the stomach is filled with sediment or
One sample set allowed the con~parisono f a mud water Indivitiuals that have recently engorged them-
star with sediment depth horizons from the grab in selves with mud exhibit a highly rounded profile. The
which it was captured (Fig.2 b).T hroughout the major- aboral surface of empty specimens may be flat or
ity of the range the mud star exhibits a particle size s1ightl.y concave. An anus is lacking. The center of the
distribution that is finer than any of the vertical depth aboral body wall is pdrticularly extensible, and forms a
horizons In the sediment surrounding it Discriminant prominent epiproctal cone (Fig. 4a). The degree of
analysis clearly separates the environment from the epiproctal cone extension is variable. The epiproctal
animal sample in this case (Edwards, 1980). cone may be inverted, or its height may be several
The largest portion of the animal sediment availdble times greater than the height of the marginal plates. In
for analysis was derived from mud stars collected by a burrowed mud star, the tip of the eplproctal cone
trawl on 26 July 1979. The mean values of sand, silt, typically is all that is visible, either in a shallow pit or
and clay-sized pdrlicies in the stomachs of these ani- protruding above the sediment surface.
mals varied considerably from the corresponding val- The epidermis of the aboral surface contains numer-
ues for specimens from the grab samples. For this ous retractile dermal branchiae, or papulae. Each
reason, sediment data from trawl-collected sea stars papula chamber is continuous with the perivisceral
were not compared with environmental sed~mendt ata. cavity through a pore in the Integument, allowing
Some sediment fractions likely could have been lost circulation for gas exchange. The papulae are capable
from the sea star during capture by trawl~ng. of great extension. An inflated papula generally stands
Particle species found In sediment obtained from at least as tall as the suture lines between individual
animal stomachs were similar to those found in spinelets and the column of an adjacent paxilla (Fig.
environmental sediment, although the frequency of 4c) and is capable of further extension. Papulae are
unidentifiable organic material relative to identif~able retracted in response to Irritation.
particles was higher in mud stars, probably the effect Both the floor of the aboral surface and the papulae
of digestion. As in environmental sediments, the larger are ciliated. Ciliation extends up the paxillar column
size fractions (<2 cP, > 250 pm) consisted primarlly of approximately as far as the suture lines between col-
worm and amphipod tubes, terrestrial plant and umn and spinelets (Fig. 4c). Beyond this point on the
macro-algal remains, and nuculid bivalve shells and column ciliation rapidly diminishes, and the spinelets
fragments. Shells and fragments of shells seemed and crown of a paxilla are not ciliated.
slightly less abundant in mud star samples than in the The general direction of ciliary movement on the
general environment. Diatoms were occasionally aboral surface of the mud star is from the center of the
~mportanti n the 1-2 d, (500-250 km) size class. Addi- dlsc and arms to the perimeter, specifically into chan-
tionally, several mud stars contamed one or more small nels leading between adjacent marginal plates. Cur-
crustaceans or mites in this size range. rents move around the bases of paxillae and papulae
Fecal pellets, diatoms, and mineral flakes in v~~rious and perhaps up thclm as well, although it was imposs-
degrees of conglomeration (perhaps the remains of ible to determ~net he latter with certainty. Mucus
fecal pellets) domindted the size classes from 2-4 d, strings are frequently found on the aboral surface, and
(250-62.5 ~inl)F ragmented echinoderm ossicles and in some cases strings and sheets of mucus may be
sponge spicules were occasionally found In these s~ze suspended from paxilla crowns.
classes. The > 4 @ (< 62.5 pri) fraction consisted Pairs of massive marginal plates surround the
primarlly of mln~ralc hips and flakes, and clay parti- perimeter of Ctenodiscus crispatus. Each pair consists
cles ranging to > 8 <P (< 3.9 In size There were of a dorsal superomarginal and a ventra.1 inferomargl-
few or no identifiable organisms or remains in this size nal plate, both of which have large spines surmounting
fraction. their uppcr surfaces.
Between adjacent pairs of su.peromargina1p 1.ates are
Morphology and Behavior deep, vertical grooves containing a number of heavily
ciliated lamellae. These ciliated channels are termed
The aboral surface of Ctenodiscus cr~spatus( Fig. cribriform organs. Adjacent marginal plates have a
4a-c) is thin and flexible, and is covered with many series of small spines along their edge that flare out



172 Mar Ecol. Prog. Ser.
over these grooves to form protective cover lamellae, Microvilli are also found on the external surfaces of the
nearly sealing the cribriform organs laterally. Occa- mud star although they are usual.ly covered by a thick
sionally, apparent fusion of the epidermis on two cover mucus coat. The number of microvilli per cell on exter-
lamellae occurs, completely bridging the opening bet- nal surfaces is much lower than on the cribriform
ween adjacent marginal plates. The lumen of each lamellae.
cribriform organ opens onto the aboral surface of the SEM examination indicates that except for cover
mud star (Fig. 4b, e). The relatively sparse ciliation of lamellae, the lamellae of the cribr~formo rgans are
the aboral surface gradually increases in density as the closely spaced, generally being separated by a dis-
entrance to the cribriform organ is approached. tance of approximately l0 pm. Cover lamellae are
The number of lamellae in a given cribriform organ separated from the cribriform lamellae by approxi-
is varlable and depends on the location of the crib- mately 125 pm. Such variation in spacing between
riform organ. Those in the center of an interradius cover and cribrlform lamellae may be an artifact of
contain the greatest number of lamellae (9-11). Dist- SEM sample preparations, since dried mud stars and
ally, cribriform organs have fewer lamellae and those transverse sections of cribriform organs (Fig. 4d)
at the tips of the arms generally have none. exhibit even spacing of lamellae perhaps more indica-
The surfaces of the cribriform lamellae are covered tive of the natural state.
with microvilli (Fig. 5). The number per cell is vari- In longitudinal section each cribriform organ is a
able. TEM sections (Fig. 5b) show that microvillar crescent-shaped channel with the lamellae located on
length varies, and that branching of microvilll occurs. the proximal surface (Fig. 4e). Lamellae at the edges of
the cribriform organ, immediately beneath the cover
lamellae, are longest, approximately 2300 pm in
length. Lamellae progressively decrease in length
toward the center of the cribriform organ, and lamellae
in the deepest part of the channel are approximately
half as long as those nearest the cover lamellae (Fig.
4d).
Cribriform lamellae do not extend beneath the
inferomarginal plates. Instead, a roughly tubular pas-
sage reaches from the bases of the superomarginal
plates to fascioles on the oral surface of the mud star.
The walls of this passage are less densely ciliated than
the lamellae of the cribriform organ itself.
A rough calculation of the ciliated area of the lamel-
lae of a single full-sized cribriform organ from the
center of an interradius gave a value of 11 mm2 per
cribriform organ. One commonly finds 12 full-sized
cribriform organs, and 16 smaller cribriform organs on
each interradius of an average-sized mud star (R =
24 mm). Assuming that the less than full-sized crib-
riform organs range from nearly fully developed,
toward the base of the arms, to simple channels with-
out lamellae at the arm tips, each was scored as the
equivalent of half of a full-sized cribriform organ. Such
figures produce a total of 60 full-sized and 80 half-
sized cribriform organs on an average-sized mud star
with a corresponding total lamellar area of 1100 mm2
individual-'.
The passages leading beneath adjacent inferomargi-
nal plates from the cribriform organs empty into fascio-
lar channels on the oral surface. Like the cribriform
organs these channels are not completely closed, but
the edges of adjacent plates tend to press closely
F I 5~. C fenodrscus crjspatus. (a) SEM micrograph of the1 sur- together more or less isolating the interior of the chan-
fdce of a cribriform lamella showing numerous m~crovillio n
each cell surface; (b) TEM micrograph of the epidermis of a nel from the surrounding environment. Each fasciole is
cr~briforml amella showlng microvilli. 15.000 X ciliated, although less heavily than the lamellae of the

Shick et al.: Sea star -sediment interactions 173
cribriform organ. Microvilli are also much less numer- vis~ble through this opening, and on occasion is
ous. The ciliary fields between the two regions are extended through the mouth frame. The peristomial
continuous. membrane is not ciliated.
A strong, orally-directed current flows throughout Wide retraction of the peristomial membrane may be
the cribriform organ/fasciolar system. Carmine parti- involved in a feeding response or a clearing mechan-
cles deposited on the aboral surface of a healthy mud ism in which surface particles become trapped in
star are carried to the perimeter of the animal by the mucus and ingested. On one occasion a mud star being
aboral ciliation, where they enter the cribriform organs observed for ciliary currents on the oral surface exhi-
and are transported toward the oral surface. Because bited an intriguing set of behaviors. As carmine parti-
the cribriform organs and associated channels are not cles originating on the aboral surface collected at the
sealed, particles are frequently ejected from the open- bases of the podia they became increasingly embed-
ings between marginal plates, particularly in the lower ded in mucus apparently originating from the tube
half of the system, and especially from the fasciolar feet. Such particles were progressively concentrated at
channels. Particles transported as far as the ambulac- the podial tips. To accomplish this, adjacent podia
nim are ejected into the region surrounding the podia. would dip into the mucus surrounding their bases,
No ciliary current was observable in those cribriform collect some amount of it, and rub it off on the surface
organs nearest the arm tips. of another podium. Continued rubbing of podia con-
Neither the walls nor the floor of the ambulacral centrated masses of mucus-embedded particles at the
groove are ciliated. Particles entering the ambulacrum tips of the podia. The mucus thus collected was then
from fasciolar channels generally exhibit movement, passed orally to the next podium in sequence. The
but such movement is random and seems directly peristomial membrane was fully expanded at this
linked with water currents created by podial activity. point, clearly exposing the stomach lining. As the
Podia are paired, lack sucking discs, and are pointed podia adjacent to the mouth received mucus from the
as in the case in many other soft-sediment dwelling sea more distal podia, they were extended through the
stars. The tip of each podium has a distinct glandular mouth frame and into contact with the stomach lining.
region. Mucus is frequently observed in the ambulac- The effect of this action was to concentrate mucus and
rum and may be produced by the podial tips. Podia1 embedded carmine particles in the stomach of the mud
surfaces are non-ciliated. star.
Podia are utilized in burrowing by the mud star. Two
mechanisms are apparent, neither of which predomi- Uptake of Primary Amines
nates in mud stars observed in the laboratory. In the
first case, the mud star plows down into the substrate The concentration of dissolved primary amines in
while moving forward. The extended podia are used as inshore clayey-silt in the Gulf of Maine averages
anchors or levers in the substrate as the mud star 4.4 pM (N = 14). ranging from 2.6 to 12.8 PM (glycine
progresses. This method of burrowing results in the equivalents). Primary amines do not appear to be
lead arm being buried first, and the rest of the body stratified according to depth, at least in the upper 3 cm
progressively follows.
The second method of burrow formation involves
sinking vertically into the sediment. The extended
podia are used to scoop to one side the sediment lying
beneath the body of the mud star, and the animal
gradually sinks into the cavity thus excavated, in a
manner similar to that reported for the genus Astropec-
ten (Kenk, 1944; Christensen, 1970). The result of
either burrowing process generally leaves only the
epiproctal cone and occasionally the arm tips visible.
Although Ctenodiscus crispatus is probably capable om A
b!.
of moving through the sediment without coming to the
l
I I I I I I I
surface, as is reported for other sediment-dwelling -50 100 150 200 250 300 350
asteroids, this was not observed in the laboratory. This Eh(mV)
may have been owing to the relatively small size of the Fig. 6. Redox (Eh) profiles in undisturbed cores taken
containers used to hold the mud stars. 24 August 1977. Circles: duplicate cores taken from grab
sample 1 Triangles: redox profile in core from grab sample 2.
The peristomial membrane is capable of great
Squares: primary amine concentrations in interstitial water
expansion, creating a mouth opening at least a cen- from top 1.5 cm and next 1.5 cm horizons of sediment in grab
timeter across in adults. The stomach lining is clearly sample l. Sediment temperature = 7.2 "C

174 h4ar Ecol. Prog. Ser. 5 165-1.84, 1981
of sediment (Fig 6), in agreement with the thorough ary amines, there was also a measurable release of
mixing of the sediment noted above. Redox profiles of thcse substances into the medium. When juveniles
undisturbed cores reveal that the sediment is oxidizing were exposed only to '.'C-glycinc (initial concentration
in nature, Eh remaining above +50 mV in the upper = 6.6 ttM) in artificial seawater and the disappearance
5 cm, with the greatest change in potential occurring of glycine monitored simultaneously by fluorometry
bctwtlen the sediment surface and 1 cm depth (Fly. 6). and liquid scintillation counting, the curves diverged
Patches of reduced sediment (indicated by the smell of after about 1.5 h (Fig. 8). Total radioactivity in
hydrogen sulfide) were also encountered in grab sam-
ples, and specimens of Ctenodiscus crispatus were
sometimes present in thcse samples. The concentration
of a single sample of primary amines from such sedi-
ment was 6.6 1tM.
Experiments in which adult specimens (1-2 g dry
weight) of Ctenodiscus crispatus were exposed to
interstitial water expressed from sediments yielded
equivocal results concerning the uptake of primary
amines. Because of the ease with which the papulae of
these specimens are damaged during removal of sur-
face mllcus and sediment, it was d~fficultto ensure that
the experimental animals were ~ntact.M icroscopic
examination of the papulae often revealed that they
had been ruptured, thus allowing perivisceral fluid to
Fig. 8. Ctcnod~scusc rispatus Depletion of I4C-glycine from
an initial concentration 01 6.6 ~IMm, easured simultaneously
by llqu~ds cintillation (8) and fluorometric (0) techniques.
Animal wet weight = 65 mg. For comparison, see deplet~on
of naturally occurring primary amlnes from the same ln~tial
concentralion (Fig. 71, and text for discussion
acidified (to drive off '"CO,) seawater samples
declined exponentially, achieving a final level equiva-
lent to 0.3 yM glycine. Total fluorescamine-positive
materials reached a plateau at about 2 PM after 4 h,
increasing to 2.3 ~LMby 18 h. Following Wright and
Stephens (1978) and Stephens et al. (1978), we inter-
pret these results as indicating the release of uniden-
tified primary amines into the medium simultaneous
with the accumulation of labelled glycine by the mud
stars.
I I I F. r Y
2 3 4 5 6 ' 1 8 The entry of glycine into Ctenodiscus crispatus tis-
Time (h)
sues proceeds by saturable and non-saturable path-
Fig. 7. Ctcnodisc~~crsi spat~lsD. eplet~ono f naturally occurring ways (Fig 9). Wright and Stephens (1978) have
primdry amines frc)nl intt~alc oncentrations of 5.1 (A), 6 6 ( 1, explained the non-saturable component as being due
and 12.8 (0)1 141, by juven~lcm ud stars of 55, 55, and 53 mg
wet wc.1(111!~, r~\pr?ctir~t.lv to the rapid labelling of a large extracellular (inulin)
space in mussel gills, and Ahearn and Townsley (1975)
leak into the incubation medium and accounting for likewise convincingly invoke a Large inulin space to
the a.pparently net leakage of primary amines. account for non-saturable entry of amino acids into the
Repetition of uptake experiments using less easily holothurian Chlridota rigida. Although extracellular
damaged juvenile specimens (average 15 mg dry space has not been measured in the present experi-
weight) produced clear evidence of a net uptake of ments, such an explanation is likely applicable to C.
natural primary amines from in~tialc oncentrations of crispatus as well. The saturable, carrier-medlated
5.1, 6.6, and 12.8 1tM (Fig.7 ) in interstiti.al water The entry of glyc~neth erefore has been quantified by cal-
residual concentration of primary amines was directly culating the constant for non-saturable entry using
related to the initial concentration, and the implica- regression analysis of the linear portion of the uptake
tions of this will be discussed below curve (rates at 18.8 to 101.3 vM) and correcting the
Despite the occurrence of a net uptake of total prim- data according to the method of Muscatine and D'Elia

Shick et al. Sea star-sediment interactions
Fig 10 Ctenod~sc~lcsrl spatcls. Schemat~cd rdw~ngo f adult
F I 9~ C tenodrscus crrspatus K~netrcsof "C-glyclne uptdke specimen (R = 24 mm) In burrow. AI-rowss how ~ncuri-enatn d
by juven~les pecimens. Closed circles ulicorlected data, dch excurrent flows of irr~gationc urrent
polnt represents mean, bars f 1 standard errol, of determ~rla-
t~onso n 3 ~nd~v~duaOlpse n circles ddta corrected fo~
unsdturable entry as descr~bedin text
(1978). The corrected data (Fig. 9) have been used to
calculate the kinetic parameters JA,,, (maximum rate of
saturable glycine influx) and K, (glycine concentration
at which J, = 0.5 JA,,,) using the statistical program of
Wilkinson (1961) for enzyme kinetics. The values
obtained are Ji,,, = 298 (2 19 S.E.) n moles g dry
'
weight h-' and K, = 2.86 (f 0.72 S.E.)p M, the latter
value being about an order of magnitude lower than
those reported in the literature for most other infaunal
marine invertebrates. The corrected K, for asparate is
3.14 i 0.33 pM and J:,,, is 28.42 1 0.54 n moles g-'
h-'. These values are unchanged by the addition of
100 PM glycine to the incubation medium, being 4.06
:1 .01 PM and 30.44 f 1.58 n moles g-' h.-', respec-
tively, indicating separate carrier systems for these
amino aclds
Burrow Irrigation and Oxygen Uptake
Fig. 11 Ctenodlscus cnspatus. Redox (Eh) profiles in sedl-
Ctenodiscus crispatus clearly irrigates its burrow ment ~nhab~tebdy 2 adult speclmens (top and bottom, respec-
with oxygenated water. A given burrowed specimen tively) in the laboratory Closed circles sed~menst everal cm
may show from 1 to 5 excurrent channels (Fig. 10), so away from burrow. Open circles, sediment adjacent to arms
hav~ngd ~stincte xcurrent channels from the burrow. Dotted
irrigation is not necessarily symmetrical. Redox pro-
c~rcless ed~menta djacent to arm lacking excurrent channel
f~leso f sediment immed~atelya djacent to distinct
excurrent channels at the tips of arms are more
strongly oxidized than are undisturbed sediments In surements, so the proviles obtained represented the
the same bowl and sediments adjacent to arm tips steady-state condition.
without excurrent channels (Fig. 11). The burrows had At an incurrent P,, of 159 mm Hg (oxygen content
been established at least 5 d prior to the redox mea- 7.22 m1 1-l at 5 "C), Ctenodiscus crispatus removes
Table 2 Ctenodiscus crispatus Parameters of water transport and oxygen uptake in a 1.5 g (dry we~ghts)p ecimen at 5°C. See text
for definition and discussion of each quantity
plo, P%> %Extr,, p ~ f ~ i % EwGi v,,1 v,, v,/ v"
(mm Hg) (mm Hg) (mm Hg) (m1 g-h-') (m1 g-h-') (I ml-l)
159 146 8.2 135 54 0 020 33.8 1.69

176 Mar Ecol. Prog. Ser. 5: 165-184, 1981
7.34 (+ 0.94, S.D.) % of the oxygen from the irrigation the study area is nearly uniform, and very fine. The
current. Because of the large volume of water flow constancy and fine nature of the particle distribution
(Table 2) and the large biomass of sea star tissue in implies a large surface area for a given volume of
contact with it, any microbial or abiological chemical sediment throughout the study area, which provides a
contributions to the 7 % oxygen utilization are prob- large substrate for bacterial growth (cf. Hargrave,
ably negligible. The directly determined V,,, oxygen 1972; Dale. 1974). This fact, and the presumed alloch-
utilization (%Extr,), and perivisceral fluid PO, in a thonous organic inputs from the Damariscotta River
1.5 g individual have been used to calculate the estuary, are probably responsible for the unusually
respiratory parameters in Table 2. The rate of water high organic content of these sedirnents.
flow. V,, was calculated using the fundamental rela- The terrestrial origin of much of the organic detritus
tionship (V,&,) %Extr, . C,@ = 1.0, (Dejours, in our samples, however, suggests that it is refractory
1975) where C,,, is the oxygen content of the incurrent and not directly available to deposit feeders. Recent
water. The effectiveness of 0, removal from the irriga- studies have shown that the bacteria associated with
tion current, %E,,, or the ratio of actual to maximum particulate organic matter are probably the primary
possible oxygen removal (Johansen and Petersen, nutritional source for detritivores (see Newell, 1979 , for
1971), was calculated as (Pi,,-P,02/Pi,,-Pp,02) X 100, many references and review). Deposit feeders from
where Pi,, and P ,, are the oxygen partial pressures in more heterogeneous sediments select food particles by
the incurrent and excurrent water, and P,,, is that in size (Rhoads and Young, 1971; Whitlatch, 1974; Fen-
the perivisceral fluid. C. crispatus does not have a chel et al., 1975; Hauksson, 1979). Other sediment
respiratory pigment, and the capacitance (P) of perivis- properties, such as specific gravity and surface texture,
ceral fluid is assumed to be the same as that of sea- can be used in sorting (Clifton and Thompson, 1978;
water. Self and Jumars, 1978). In all of these cases a large
bacterial population on the particles may make them
attractive to deposit feeders.
DISCUSSION In contrast to such selectivity, mud star stomach
contents and environmental sediment show marked
An infaunal existence in easily disturbed sediments similarity in particle size distribution (Fig. 2). The only
of very fine particle size accounts for a number of apparent difference between the two is that the mud
structural and physiological adaptations in Ctenodis- star generally shows a particle distribution that is
cus crispatus which are not seen in most asteroids. The slightly enriched in the finest particle sizes as com-
habitat and the morphological features are similar to pared to the environment. As outlined below, this
those in the deep-sea Porcellanasteridae, and the discrepancy IS probably related to burrow irrigation
results of our studies of the functional morphology and and efforts by the mud star to keep epidermal surfaces
physiology of C. crispatus may be applicable to these clear of fouling particles.
animals as well. On average, sediment obtained from the stomachs of
sea stars contains three times more organic material
(28.1 O/O vs 9.7 %) than the environmental sediment by
Deposit Feeding weight, implying some means of organic enrichment.
Additionally, the range of mean values observed is
The results suggest that Ctenod~scusc rispatus is very wide. This degree of varlation in the organic
nonselective and feeds on bulk sediment. The mud star content of sediment in the animal cannot be accounted
occurs in an environment which renders unnecessary for by variations in the organic content of environmen-
an energy expenditure for particle sorting. Several tal sediments in the study area.
facts support this ~deaF.i rst, the organic content of the Organic enrichment of the stomach contents of mud
sediments encountered is relatively high, averaging stars could occur in several ways. At least some of the
9.7 % of the substrate by weight. Very few values for variation observed is probably owing to the secretion
sediment organic content reported in the literature, of digestive juices into the stomach during digestion.
which range from 0.1 % in the deep sea (Sanders et al., Since it proved impossible to induce animals to feed in
1965) to 17.4 % in the intertidal and shallow subtidal the laboratory, the stage of digestion at which samples
sediments (Johnson, 1974), are higher. Second, the were taken could not be controlled.
range of mean sediment organic content is very nar- Secondly, some organic contamination may have
row, and shows little or no seasonal variation. Thus the resulted from the forced extrusion of sediment from the
sediments of the study area represent a rich and con- mouth of the mud star, which, however gently done,
stant food resource for deposit feeding organisms. may damage internal tissues and cause release of body
Finally, the particle size distribution of sediments in fluids into the stomach contents.

Shick et al.: Sea star -sediment interactions l77
A third possibility is that mucus enrichment of the incurrent opening are carried into the burrow, but
stomach contents occurs, and we in fact have observed those placed on the surface of the immediately adja-
the mud star to ingest this material, although we do not cent sediment are not. (In nature, however, the intake
concur with Gislen's (1924) assessment that Ctenodis- of surface particles resuspended by bottom currents or
cus crispatus is a ciliary-mucoid feeder, as discussed bioturbation could occur.)
below. Mucus likely keeps the respiratory surfaces The presence of amphipod and polychaete tube frag-
clear of fouling particles, an important function in an ments, bivalve shells, and other large particles in the
infaunal animal respiring through exposed epidermal sediment-filled stomachs of many specimens (see
structures. 'Results'; also, Sokolova, 1958, and Carey, 1972)
Why should Ctenod~scusc r~spatubs e a nonselective argues against Ctenodiscus crispatus being purely a
deposit feeder when it would appear advantageous to ciliary-mucoid feeder and suggests that the animal
ingest selectively the smallest particles present ingests sediment in bulk. Although the mud star does
(Taghon et al., 1978), since these should have the indeed ingest mucus-imbedded particles (as originally
highest organic content (see Newell, 1979 for review) suggested by Gislen), the principal role of the mucus is
and represent the best food resource? Two possibilities to maintain an epidermis unencumbered by such
are sugested. First, the study area represents an unusu- materials, and its ingestion is largely a means of recy-
ally rich and uniform food source for deposit feeding cling a copious extracellular secretion which is
animals. Second, the particle distribution of the sedi- energetically expensive to produce (see Calow, 1977,
ment is homogeneous and extremely fine. The combi- pp. 23-27). Because mucus production and consump-
nation of these factors produces a situation in which no tion is probably variable over time, this mechanism
particle selectivity is required to maximize organic could partly account for the increased variability and
input. richness of the stomach organic content as compared to
the surrounding environment, as well as explaining
the observations of Gislen.
Cribriform Organ Function The slight enr~chrnento f the stomach contents with
fine particles (Fig. 2, Table l), which likely have a
Since Ctenodiscus crispatus is not a selective deposit higher organic content than larger particles (e.g.
feeder, what is the function of the cribriform organs, as Newell, 1979, p. 355 et seq.),p robably reflects the fact
it would appear that their closely opposed, heavily that the smaller particles are more likely to be sepa-
ciliated lamellae (Fig. 4, d, e, f) are ideal for particle rated from the sediment by ciliary currents, passed
sorting? Past authors have attributed several functions through the crlbriform organs, and subsequently trap-
to the cribriform organs. Sladen (1883) described por- ped in mucus and ingested. Such a mechanism of
cellanasterid cribriform organs as 'percolators', appa- particle 'selectivity' is discussed by Self and Jumars
rently in reference to the water currents that pass (1978).
through them, and was of the opinion that they were When Ctenodiscus crispatus irrigates its burrow, a
respiratory in nature. Gislen (1924),o bserving C. cris- strong excurrent flow occurs through channels extend-
patus, concurred with Sladen about a probable ing from the arm tips (Fig. 10), despite the absence of
respiratory function, but also noted that small particles ciliary tracts oriented in this direction (see 'Results';
were carried through the cribriform organs to subse- also, Gislen, 1924). Such a large flow, which is directed
quent entrapment in mucus and eventual ingestion, through the oral fascioles and along the ambulacra, is
suggesting a role in ciliary-mucoid feeding. Lieber- actually created in the cribriform organs (specifically,
kind (1935) noted the presence of amoebocytes in the by the heavy ciliation on the cribriform lamellae),
ciliated epithelium of the lamellae In C. crispatus and which act as 'turbines' and create sufficient force to
postulated that one of their functions was excretion. drive the water through the sparsely ciliated, lamella-
Madsen (1961a) stated that both respiration and feed- lacking channels beneath the inferomarginal plates,
ing are accomplished with the cribriform organs but into the sparsely ciliated fascioles and non-ciliated
did not suggest an excretory function. ambulacral grooves, and out of the burrow via the
None of the above hypotheses was verified by hydraulically-excavated excurrent channels.
observing living specimens burrowed in mud. When
Ctenodiscus crispatus is maintained in the laboratory,
it establishes a temporary burrow (which it occupies Burrow Irrigation and Oxygen Uptake
from several days up to several weeks) and produces
strong currents through the burrow, but the wholesale The irrigation of a burrow by the mud star provides
transport of surface material into the burrow is not an opportunity to examine respiratory parameters not
seen. Carmine particles pipetted directly into the feasible in other asteroids. The extraction of oxygen

178 Mar Ecol. Prog. Ser. 5: 165-184, 1981
from this current averages about 7-8 '10, the same as in generalize that active and sedentary deposit feeders
most benthic filter-feeding invertebrates employing are likewise largely incompatible; both of these
cilia-driven currents and lacking respiratory pigments studies implicate the difficulty in maintaining unim-
(Jorgensen, 1975; Mangum and Burnett, 1975; Bayne paired gas exchange surfaces in fine sediments as a
et al., 1976; Mangum, 1977). This value is lower than major factor in determining soft-bottom community
the 18 O/O seen in Pteraster tesselatus (Johansen and structure. C crispatus is a potentially mobile deposit
Petersen, 1971), which uses muscle-driven, tidal venti- feeder having a respiratory surface that is highly sus-
lation of its primary respiratory surface in its nidamen- ceptible to clogging. The mud star has adapted to life
tal chamber The convection requirement (v,,,/v,,,), or in easily disturbed sediments by limiting its mobility
liters of water pumped per milliliter of 0, removed and establ~shingte mporary burrows, using the extens-
from the current, is 1.69 in Ctenodiscus crispatus. This ible epiproctal cone to maintain a connection with the
value is only slightly higher than that in a variety of water column. The burrow itself is irrigated by ciliary
animals having respiratory pigments and employing currents, which, based on laboratory observations, pro-
muscle-driven, truly r e S p i r a t o r y currents (Man- vide a continuous respiratory flow with a minimum of
gum, 1977). Interestingly, it is similar to the value of disturbance of the flocculent sediment.
about 1.6 (calculated from the data in Johansen and
Petersen, 1971) in Pteraster tesselatus, although a
direct comparison is difficult because oxygen entry is Uptake of Primary Amines and Glycine
not restricted to the actively-ventilated nidamental
chamber in P. tesselatus. The convection requirement The rather low concentration (2.6-12.8 PM) of prim-
in C. crispatus is lower than that in filter-feeding ary amines in interstitial water reported in this study is
bivalves (ca 3-20: Jnrgensen, 1966, 1975; Bayne et al., in good agreement with the only other data for amino
1976), in which the current is more closely adjusted to acid concentrations in oxidized sediments in the Gulf
feeding, rather than to respiratory, requirements. of Maine (Henrichs and Farrington, 1979) and in
It is generally accepted that the low percentage of 0, oxidized sediments elsewhere (Degens, 1970; North,
extraction by bivalves reflects the feeding nature of the 1975). This concentration is an order of magnitude
irrigation current, but this hypothesis was framed lower than that in reduced sediments (Degens, 1970).
mindful of the low availability of particulate food and Based on studies of the uptake and release of these
in the absence of relevant data on gas exchange para- compounds from the very high concentrations prevail-
meters. More pertinent than the percent of 0, removed ing in intertidal, reduced sediments by invertebrate
is the actual effectiveness (%E,,,) of its removal, the infauna (Stephens, 1975; Crowe et al., 1977; Stephens
ratio of actual uptake to the maximum possible, given et al., 1978; Costopulos et al., 1979), the likelihood of
the diffusion gradient that exists. The value in their net uptake from the very low concentrations
Ctenodiscus crispatus is 54 a rather high value that reported here would at first appear to be slight. How-
O/O,
is identical to that in Pteraster tesselatus, and may be ever, the transport systems in Ctenodiscus crispatus
related to the effective convection of the external and are adapted for accumulating primary amines from the
internal (see Shick, 1976) media in these, relative to low ambient concentrations in the habltat.
other, asteroids. The maintenance of a high P,, in a A net uptake of naturally occurring primary amines
large volume of perivisceral fluid in C. crispatus (Table by Ctenodiscus crispatus has been demonstrated
2) may be important as an oxygen store during tempor- (Fig. 7). This is related to the very high affinity of the
ary burial in unstable sediments and during excursions transport systems involved, the Kp for glycine and
deeper into the sediment. aspartate being approximately 3 1iM These values are
These relationships indirectly argue for the primacy thus in the same range as their concentrations in inter-
of a respiratory, as opposed to a feeding, function of the stitial water. Also, the glycine transport system has a
ciliary currents through Ctenodiscus crispatus bur- very high capacity (Jh,, = 298 n moles g-; h-').
rows. The adoption of a cilia-driven respiratory current After juvenile mud stars were exposed to solutions of
(from which oxygen extraction is low) by this species natural primary amines, the residual concentration in
and by other goniopectinid and porcellanasterid sea the medium was directly related to the initial concen-
stars likely relates both to the hydrodynamic and tration provided (Fig. 7). This result may be explained
mechanical limitations lmposed by the basic asteroid in part by the presence in interstitial water of fluores-
body plan, and to the fragile nature of the burrow in camine-positive substances for which there is no trans-
silty sediments. Rhoads and Young (1970) have noted port system, or one of very low activity. Likely candi-
that mobile deposit feeders disturb soft sediments and dates are the acidic amino acids. Henrichs and Far-
interfere with the activities of suspension feeders, and rington (1979)r eport that glutamic acid and its isomer,
Levinton (1977) has extended this concept to D-aminoglutaric acid, and asparti.~a c~dp,r edominate

Sh~cke t a1 Sea star-s ediment lnteracrlons 179
among the amino acids in Gulf of Maine sediments. body of evidence indicates that the K, values foi vaii-
(Glycine is the next most concentrated amino acid). ous amino acid transpoit systems are in the same lange
Our results indicate that although the affinity of the as the amino acid concentratlons norrnallv encoun-
aspartate transport system In Ctenodiscus cl- spatu us is tered by the carriers Thus the rathei hlgh K,s in
high, its activity is low (J:,,,, = 28 n moles g-' h-'), an infaunal invertebrates (reviewed by Jorgensen 1976
order of magnitude lower than that of the glycine and Stewart 1979) are interpretable in the 11ght of the
carrler A low activity of acidic amino acid transport high substrate concentratlons normt~llyf ound in the11
systems has precedent in another echinoderm, the habitat in intertidal, reduced sediments A seeming
sand dollar Dendraster excentl-icus (Stephens et al., inconsistency to the above generalization, that
1978), and in some annelids (Stephens, 1975) and reported K, values In epifaunal and planktonic inverte-
pogonophorans (Southward and Southward, 1980). brates are about an order of magn~tudeh igher than
There is also a release into the medium of primary anuno acid concentrations In the water column has
amines from C. crispatus, as seen in the experiments in only recently been resolved Wr~ghta nd Stephens
which glycine concentration was measured both (1978) have shown that the high K, values seen in
radiochen~icallya nd fluorometrically (Fig. 8). excised bivalve gill preparations are art~factsd ue to
Despite the low rate of uptake of some components the presence of unstirred layers at the transport sur-
of the interstitial medium and the release of some face When amino acid uptake 1s measured in intact,
primary amines into it, the fact of a net uptake of total actively-ventilating mussels, in which unstirred layers
primary amines nevertheless remains. Assuming that are el~minateda t the gill surface, K, values on the order
1 mg of mixed amino acids requires 1 m1 of OL for of 1-2 uM obtain
complete oxidation, the initial rates of uptake from the The elimination of unstirred layers at the transport-
concentrations shown in Fig. 7 could support 16.5, ing epithelium likely occurs in Ctenod~scusc rispatus
26.5, and 86.5 %, respectively, of the known oxygen as well and piobably accounts for the low K, values we
consumption rate (200 p1 g-' h-' at 8 "C) of a 15-mg observe in this species Specifically, the lamellae
juvenile, so that dissolved primary amines at natural within the cribriform organs are heavily ciliated
concentrations make a quantitatively significant con- (Fig 4f), and moreover are arranged such that the
tribution to the mud star's diet, although we do not d~mensionso f the interlamellar spaces (Fig 4d and e)
assume that all of the accumulated amino acids neces- are within the range consistent with the elimination of
sarily enter ox~dativep athways (see Shick, 1975). unstilred layers by cillary activity (Winne, 1973,
Because we do not know the rate at which Ctenodis- Wright and Stephens 1978, Wright, 1979) Impor-
cus crispatus ingests sediment or what the animal tantly, the cilia arise from closely opposed surfaces
removes from it, the relative importance of dissolved, which are richly supplied wlth microvilli (Fig 5), the
as opposed to particulate, food sources is unknown. latter being characteristic of transporting epithelia
Further, although steady-state concentrations of prim- Further evidence that the cribriform lamellae may be
ary amines in interstitial water in the habitat range the major sites of amino acid uptake is that miclovilli
from 3-13 FM, the seastar irrigates its burrow with are very sparse in areas such as the channels beneath
seawater from the overlying water column, which the lnferomarginal plates fascioles ambulacrum and
likely has a lower content of these substances. Con- peristomial membrane, all of which surfaces also
versely, irrigation of the burrow w~tho xygenated either lack cil~ao r are sparsely ciliated and which
water may stimulate microbial production in adjacent therefore will have unstirred layers associated with
sediments (Stephens, 1975), which although oxidized, them Although the cribrlform lamellae are restricted
are nevertheless probably anoxic (Revsbech et al., to the grooves beneath the supeiomarginal ossicles
1980).T he resultant final concentration of amino acids (Fig 4e),t hey nevertheless present a large sulface area
at the sea star's skin surface is difficult to predict, thus for transport the lamellar surface in an average-sized
complicating a quantification of the importance of dis- adult mud star (1 5 g dry weight, R = 24 mm) is
solved exogenous amino acids in its diet. approximately 11 cm2
Using direct and indirect lines of evidence, Sepers Following Ferguson (1967 1970, 1980), Pearse and
(1977) and Siebers (1979) have argued that dissolved Pearse (1973), Ahearn and Townsley (1975), and
organic con~poundsa re quantitatively unimportant in Stephens et a1 (1978) we realize that only limited
the nutrition of epifaunal and pelagic marine inverte- exchange of nutrients between the epidermis and
brates. Briefly, they contend that marine bacteria, by internal tissues occurs in echinoderms, so that dlssol-
virtue of their very low K, values (high affinities) for ved organic matter in seawater may be of spec~al
dissolved organic substances, outcompete inverte- importance in the nutrition of superficial tissues
brates for these compounds and keep the concentration Related to this is the fact that microv~llia re common
of dissolved organic matter in seawater low. A large elements of the surface structure of echinoderms - a

180 Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser.
recent electron microscopy study of the echinoderm layer is usually high, and may be greater than that of
cuticle by Holland and Nealson (1978) has demons- the sediment layers below it (Johnson, 1974). This is
trated microvilli on the epidermal surfaces of all five probably explained by the rapid colonization of fecal
extant classes in the phylum. In Ctenodiscus crispatus, material by bacteria (e.g. Longbottom, 1970). Although
much of the energy required for the substantial ciliary the sediment at our study site appears extremely well
activity in the cribriform lamellae that create the bur- mixed, this condition probably does not obtain in
row irrigation current (and which are especially rich in deep-sea sediments which show more stratification
microvilli) may therefore be derived directly from solu- owing to smaller populations of invertebrate mac-
tion in seawater. rofauna.
Deep-sea asteroids of the family Porcellanasteridae
have long been recognized as 'mud swallowers',
Mode of Life of Ctenodiscus crispatus and the Deep- although Madsen (1961a, p. 50) explicitly states that
Sea Porcellanasteridae they 'most certainly do not leave their burrows for
feeding. And since they can hardly be considered just
Ctenodiscus crispatus probably spends the majority swallowing the bottom material below them (which
of its time in temporary burrows in the uppermost would be of small value as food), . . . they are able to
layers of the sediment. A connection with the overlying secure from above the surface material comparatively
water column is maintained by the extensible epiproc- rich in organic matter'. This would be accomplished
tal cone. Respiratory water is pumped across the aboral 'by means of water currents created by the cribriform
surface, through the cribriform organs and fascioles of organs, to draw down the surface material. . . in order
the interradial areas, and into the ambulacral grooves. that it may be caught in the mucus secretion and then
Excurrent channels are hydraulically excavated from led to the mouth by the podia' (Madsen, 1961b, p. 181).
the arm tips to the sediment surface. Most or all of the This is despite his recognition (1961a, p. 50) that por-
motive force of the respiratory current is supplied by cellanasterid stomachs also contain large items such as
the ciliation of the cribriform lamellae. Additionally, as pieces of worm tubes, a whole sea urchin, fecal pellets,
outlined above, the respiratory current may supply a and terrestrial plan debris, and his related conclusion
significant amount of nutrition to the mud star in the that these sea stars also act as scavengers and faculta-
form of DOM. Such uptake is probably especially tive predators. His conclusion of ciliary-mucoid feed-
important to epidermal cell layers, particularly those of ing is drawn heavily from Gislen's (1924) description of
the cribriform lamellae. The mucus abundantly pro- the biology of Ctenodiscus crispatus.
duced by the mud star likely serves to keep the Conversely, Sokolova (1958), in a study of stomach
epithelium free of fouling particles incidentally drawn contents in Ctenodiscus crispatus and the porcellanas-
into the burrow, rather than having a feeding function. terids Eremicaster tenebrarius and Thoracaster mag-
Because feeding is not ciliary-mucoid in nature, fill- nus, concluded that they ingest mud directly, and
ing the stomach is probably accomplished by simply stated that 'if the species of sea stars had fed by means
retracting the peristomial membrane and shoveling of water currents generated by ciliary movements of
substrate into the mouth with the adjacent podia. This the epithelia1 cells . . ., their stomachs would have con-
could easily be accomplished during burrowing, and tained not benthic ooze but rather a more or less finely
would actually reduce the amount of sediment that filtered detritus, (but) this fact was not so' (transl.ation
must be removed from beneath the asteroid. Digestion by D. E. Howard). Our quantitative analysis of stomach
of the organic content of the sediment, including occa- contents in C. crispatus is thus in agreement with the
sional macrofauna, probably takes place while the observations by Sokolova (1958) and Carey (1972).
mud star resides in the burrow. All of the above observations are consistent with our
Upon completion of digestion the peristomial mem- previous suggestion that Ctenodiscus crispatus, and
brane is opened widely and indigestible material now, the Porcellanasteridae, non-selectively ingest
extruded from the stomach, a behavior we frequently bulk sediment and occasionally other macrofauna liv-
observed in freshly-collected specimens. Probably the ing in it. If even the surface deposits of stratified deep-
mud star then moves a short distance before refilling sea sediments are organically poor, a benthic feeder
the stomach with sediment. An advantage to surfacing would galn little by rely~nge xclusively on ciliary cur-
before moving is the ability of maximize intake of the rents to gradually provide such materials as food, and
uppermost sediment layers. Although surface sedi- in fact we have observed that the currents produced by
ment does not always contain the smallest part~cles, C. crispatus entrain few particles from the sediment
primarily owing to sediment reworking and fecal pel- surface. Indeed, Sokolova (1958) specifically excluded
let formation by deposit feeders (Rhoads and Young, this feeding mode from those that she considered
1970), the organic content of the flocculent surface adapted for subsistence on organically poor abyssal

Shick et al.: Sea star-sediment interactions 181
deposits. It is more likely that infaunal, mud-swallow- est fine fraction in such sediments, the animal likely
ing asteroids periodically ascend to the surface, ingest simply increases the total amount that it ingests, and
bulk sediment there, and retire to an irrigated (= Sokolova (1958) has noted that specimens from organi-
oxygenated) burrow to digest the meal. The reduction cally poor substrates contain proportionally more sedi-
in number of cribriform organs and increase in their ment than do those from richer habitats.
Although the initial interests of physiologists in
deep-sea animals concerned adaptations to high hy-
drostatic pressure and constant low temperature,
increasing attention is being paid to the chronically
low availability of food and its biological manifesta-
tions (low protein content of tissues, low metabolic
rates, low levels of activity, etc.). Continuous food
scarcity is now viewed as a major determinant of adap-
tive strategies in deep-sea animals (e.g. Somero et al.,
in press). If the low level and refractory nature of
particulate organic matter in deep-sea sediments (San-
ders et al., 1965) is indeed a limiting factor for benthic
invertebrates there (e.g., Sokolova, 1959, 1972; Rex et
al., 1979; for consideration of asteroids, see Carey,
1972), then the nutritional importance of dissolved
primary amines and other organic molecules in deeper
populations of Ctenodiscus crispatus and in other
goniopectinid and porcellanasterid sea stars such as
Erernicaster may be relatively enhanced, since amino
acid concentrations in deep-sea sediments (Henrichs
and Farrington, 1979) are similar to those in the pre-
sent study. This of course assumes that deep-sea
asteroids have amino acid transport systems with kine-
tic parameters comparable to those seen in C. crispatus
in the present study. (The shallow-water asteroid
Echinaster also shows a net uptake of primary amines
from concentrations below 1 PM; Ferguson, 1980).
Unfortunately, no data on amino acid transport by truly
deep-sea asteroids are available, although the rate of
glucose uptake by the sea star Plutonaster from a depth
of 1800 m (Southward and Southward, 1972a) is con-
siderably greater than that in the shallow-water
Fig. 12. Eremicaster sp. Two specimens from University of polychaete Nereis diversicolor (Ahearn and Gomme,
Maine Station 51; 57"22.6'S. 26"34.0'W; 26 May 1975;
1975) and similar to that in a number of deep-sea and
2249-2403 m. (a) Aboral surface and mdrginal plates. as well
shallow-water pogonophorans (Southward and South-
as cribriform organs of one ~nterradius,w ith madrepor~te.I n
specimen where R = 19 mm, r = 9 mm. (b) Oral surface of ward, 1972b). These admittedly tenuous comparisons
specimen in which R = 26 mm. r = 12 mm. Note lack of at least suggest that the general slowing of metabolic
channels in the oral interradial area processes in the deep sea may not extend to the trans-
port of exogenous organic substrates by benthic in-
complexity in porcellanasterids such as Erernicaster vertebrates.
(Fig. 12a) relative to C, crispatus should retain a large The phanerozonian sea stars are well-adapted to life
current flow. The absence of fascioles on the oral in soft sediments. The ingestion of these sediments
surface (Fig. 12b), which in C. crispatus convey any provides a stable and organically complex source of
resuspended particles directly into the ambulacra, is nutrition, which in Ctenodiscus crispatus is manifested
further evidence that feeding on current-entrained as a less strongly seasonal reproduction than in all
particles is not the rule in these asteroids. other asteroids studied to date and in a high genetic
The enormously expansible stomach in Ctenodiscus variability in this population (Shick et al., in press).
crispatus may be an adaptation to the low (and refrac- Aseasonal reproduction and large amounts of genetic
tory) organic matter which some populations variation likewise are common in other omnivorous,
encounter. Rather than sieving for the organically rich- deep-sea echinoderms and seem related to their gener-

182 Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser 5: 165-184, 1981
ally small size, limited vagility, and especially the Dale. N. G. (1974). Bacteria ln ~nt~rtidsaeld iments: factors
stability and organic complexity of their diets, as related to their ciistribution. Limnol. Ocednogr. 19:
509-5 18
demonstrated in the present study of C. crispatus.
Dcgcns, E. T. (1970). Molecular nature of nitrogenous com-
pounds in sea water and recent marlne sedimcnts. In:
Acknowledgements. Thls work has been aided by numerous Hood, D. W (ed.)S ymposium on organlc mi~tterin naturdl
people, whose efforts we greatly appreciate: R. G. and B. D. watem. Institute of Marine Scirnce, Un~versityo f Alaska,
Gustafson. A. Lcamy, E. F. Lowe. W. F. Taylor, and other Collc~geA, laska, pp. 77-106
friends occasiondlly pressc.d into service, for shipboard assist- Dejours, P. (1975). Principles of comparative respiratory phy-
ance; the Ira C. Darling < enter of the University of Maine for siology, North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam
use of the R. V 'Lee', and especially boat captains F. Bowers Edwards, K. C. (1980). Morphology and feeding biology of
and M. Dunn, for thelr cooperation; H H. DeWltt and D. Ctc~nodiscusc rispatus (Ech~nodermataA. steroidea) M. S.
Schnitker for the loan of collecting gear; K. Melansnn for aid thesis, University of Maine, Orono, ~MaineU SA
in particle size determinations and computer andlyses; G. Fenchel, T., Koefoed, L. H., Lappalainen, A. (1975). Particle
Miekina and S. Tyler for assistance with and discussions size selection of two deposit feeders: the amphipod
about electron microscopy, D. E. Howard for translations from Corophium volutator and the prosobranch Hydrobla
the Russlan, and B. L. Bayne, R. C. Newell, and A. J. ant1 E. C. ulvae. Mar Blol. 30: 119-128
Southward for critically reading the manuscript. The research Ferguson, J. C. (1967). An autoradiographic study of the
was supported by US National Science Foundation grant utillzation of free exogenous amino acids by starfishes.
PCM76-81467 (Regulatory Biology) to J. M. Shick and J H. Biol. Bull. mar biol. Lab.. Woods Hole 133: 317-329
Dearborn. Some technical support and the Erernicaster mate- Ferguson, J C. (1970). An autoradiographic study of the
rial were obtained under NSF grants OPP74-08565 A01 and translocation and utillzation of amino acids by starf~sh.
DPP76-23043 (Polar Programs) to H. H. DeWltt, J. D. Biol. Bull. mar biol. Ldb., Woods Mole 138: 14-25
McCleave, and J. H. Dearborn. Ferguson, J. C:. (1980). Fluxes of dissolved amino acids bet-
ween sea water and Echinaster. Comp. Biochem. Physiol.
65A: 291-295
Fisher, W K (1911). Asterotdea of the North Pacific and
LITERATURE CITED adjacent waters. Part I. Phanerozonia and Spinulosa Bull.
U.S. natn. Mus. 76: 1-419
Ahearn. G. A., Gomme, J. (1975). Transport of exogenous D- Folk, R. L. (1974).P etrology of sedimentary rocks, Hemphill's,
glucose by the integument of a polychaete worm (Nereis Austin, Texas
diversicolor Miiller). J exp. Biol. 62: 243-264 GislPn, T (1924) Echinoderm studles. 2001. Bidr. Uppsala 9:
Ahearn, G A.. Townsley, S. J. (1975). Integumentary amino 1-316
acid transport and metabolism In the apodous sea Grainger, E. H. (1966).S ea stars (Echinodermata: Asteroidea)
cucumber. Chiridota rigida. J. exp. Biol. 62: 733-752 of arctic North America. Bull. Fish. Res. Bd Can. 152: 1-70
Alton, M. S. (1966). Bathymetric distribution of sea stars Grossert, J. S., Mathiaparanam, P., Hebb. G. D., Price, P,,
(Asteroidea)o ff the northern Oregon coast. J. Fish. Res. Rd Campbell, I. M. (1973). The sterols of the echinoderm,
Can. 23: 1673-1714 Ctenodiscus crispatus (Retzius). Experientla 29: 258-259
Bayne, B. L., Widdows, J , Thompson, R. J. (1976).P hys~ologi- Hargrave, B. T (1972). Aerobic decomposition of sedlment
cal integrations. In: Bayne, B. L. (ed.) Marine mussels: and detritus as a funct~ono f particle surface area and
Their ecology and physiology. Cambridge University organic content. Limnol. Oceanogr 17: 583-596
Press, Cambridge, pp. 261-291 Hauksson, E. (1979). Feeding biology of Stichopus tremulus, a
Byers, S. C ,M ills, E. L., Stewart, P. L. (1978).A comparison of deposit-feeding holothurian. Sarsia 64: 155-160
methods of determining organic carbon in manne sedl- Henrichs, S. M., Farrington, J W. (1979). Amino aclds In
rnents, wlth suggestions for a standard method. Hyd- interstitial waters of marine sediments. Nature, Lond 279:
robiologia 58: 43-47 319-322
Calow, P. (1977). Ecology, evolution and energetics: a study Holland, N. D.. Jesperson, A. (1973). The fine structure of the
in metabolic adaptation. In: Macfayden. A. (ed.)A dvances fertil~zation membrane of the feather star Cornanthus
in ecological research, Vol. 10 Academic Prcss, New japonica (Ech~nodermataC- rinoidea) Tlssue & Cell 5:
York, pp. 1-62 209-21.4
Carey, A. G., Jr (1972). Food sources of sublittoral, bathyal Holland, N. D., Nealson. K. H. (1978).T he flne structure of the
and abyssal astero~dsI n the northeast Pacific Ocedn. echinoderm cuticle and the s~~bcuticulabra cterla of
Ophelia 10: 35-47 echinoderms. Acta 2001. 59: 169-185
Cavanaugh, G. M. (ed ) (1956). Formulae and methods V1 of Holmc., 3. A (1964). Methods of sampling the benthos Adv.
the Mar~neB iological Laboratory chemical room, Marine mar Biol. 2: 171-260
Biolog~calL aboratory, Woods Hole, Massachusetts Hyman, L. H. (1955). The ~nvertebrates.E chlnodermata, the
Christensen, A. M. (1970). Feeding biology of the sea-star coelomate Bilateria, Vol. IV, ~McGraw-HillI nc., New York
Astropr!cten irregularis Pennant. Ophelia 8: 1-134 Johansen, K., Petersen, J. A. (1971). Gas exchange and active
Clifton, H. E.. Thompson, J. K. (1978). Macaronichnus seg- ventilation In a starfish. Pteraster tesselatus. Z. vergl.
regatis: a feeding structure of shallow marine polychaetes. Physiol. 71 365-381
J. sedlm. Petrol. 48: 1293-1302 Johnson, R. G. (1974). Part~culatem atter at the sedlment-
Costopulos, J. J., Stephens, G. C., Wright, S. H. (1979).U ptake water interface in coastal environments J mar Res. 32:
of amlno acids by marine polychaetes under anoxic condi- 313-330
tions. B~olB. ull. mar biol. Lab., Woods Hole 157: 434-444 Jsrgensen, C. B. (1966). Biology of suspension feeding, Perga-
Crowe, J. H., Dickson, K. A,O tto, J. L., Colon, R. D., Farley, K. mon Press Inc., New York
K. (1.977).U ptake of amino acids by the mussel, ~Modiolus Jargensen, C B (1975).C omparative physiology of suspen-
demissus. J. exp. Zool. 202: 323-332 slon feedlng A. Rev. Physiol 37. 57-79

Shirk et al.: Sea sta
Jorgensen, C. B. (1976). August Putter. August Krogh, and introduction to the study of deep-sea benthic fauna1
modern ideas on the use of dissolved organic matter in assemblages along the Gay Head-Bermuda transect. Deep
aquatic environments. Blol. Rev. 51. 291-328 Sea Kes. 12: 845-867
Kenk. R. (1944). Ecological observations on two Puerto Rlcan Self, R. F. L.. Jumars, P. A. (1978). New resource axes for
echinoderms, Mellita lata and Astropeclen marginatus. deposit feeders? J. mar. Res. 36: 627-641
Biol. Bull. mar biol. Ldb.. Woods Hole 87: 177-187 Sepers. A. B. J. (1977). The utilization of dissolved organic
Levinton, J. S. (1977). Ecology of shallow water cl(?posit- compounds in aquatic environments. Hydrobiologia 52:
feedlng communlt~esQ uisset Harbor. Massarhusetts. In: 39-54
Coull, B.C. (ed.) Ecology of marlne benthos. University of Sheldon, R. W , Parsons, T R. (1967). A practical manual on
South Carolina Press, Columbia, South Carolina, pp. the use of the Coulter Counter in marine research, Coulter
191-227 Electron~csS ales Co., Toronto, Canada
Lieherkind, I. (1935). Asteroidea I Porcellanasterldae. Dan. Sh~ckJ, M. (1975) Uptake and utilization of dissolved gly-
Ingolf-Exped. 4: 1-37 clne by Aurelia aurita scyphistomae: temperdture effects
Longbottom, M. R. (1970) The distribution of Arenicola on the uptake process; nutritional role of dissolved amlno
marina (L.) with part~cularr eference to the effects of acids Blol. Bull. mar. biol. Lab., Woods Hole 148: 117-140
particle slze and organic matter of sediments. J. exp, mar Shick, J. M (1976).P hysiological and behavioral responses to
Biol. Ecol. 5: 138-157 hypox~aa nd hydrogen sulfide in the infaunal asteroid
Madsen, F. J (1961a). The Porcellanasteridae. A mono- Ctenodiscus crispatus. Mar Biol. 37: 279-289
graphic rrvision of an abyssal group of sea stars. Galathea Shick. J. M., Taylor, W. F., Lamb, A. N. (in press). Reproduc-
Rep. 4: 33-174 tion and genetic variation in the deposit-feeding sea star
Madsen. F. J. (1961b).O n the zoogeography and origin of the Ctenodiscus crispatus. Mar Biol.
abyssal fauna in view of the knowledge of the Porcel- Siebers, D. (1979). Transintegumentary uptake of dissolved
lanasteridae. Galathea Rep. 4: 177-218 amino acids in the sea star Asterias rubens. A reassess-
Mangum, C. P. (1977). The analysis of oxygen uptake and ment of its nutritional role with special reference to the
transport in different kinds of animals. J. exp. mar Biol. significance of heterotrophic bacteria. Mar Ecol. Prog.
EcoI. 27: 125-140 Ser. 1: 169-177
Mangum, C. P., Burnett, L E. (1975).T he extraction of oxygen Sladen, W P. (1883).T he Asteroidea of H. M. S. 'Challenger'
by estuarine invertebrates In: Vernberg, F. J. (ed.)P hy- Exped~tion- Part 11. J. Linn Soc. Zool. 17: 214-269
siological ecology of estuarine organisms. University of Sokal, R R., Rohlf, F. J. (1969). Biometry, the prlnclples and
South Carolina Press, Columbld, South Carolina, pp. practice of stat~stlcsIn biological research, W. H. FI-eeman
147-163 & Company, San Francisco
Mortensen, Th. (1927). Handbook of the echinoderms of the Sokolova, M. N (1958). Nutrition of deepwater benthic
British Isles, Oxford University Prctss, Edinburgh invertebrate detritus-feeders (Russ.).T rudy Inst. Okeanol.
Muscatine, L., D'Elia, C. F. (1978).T he uptake, retention and 27- 123-153
release of ammonium by reef corals. L~mnol.O ceanogr Sokolova, M. N. (1959). On the distribution of deep-water
23: 725-734 bottom animals in relation to their feeding habits and the
Newell. R. C. (1979). Biology of intertidal animals, 3rd ed., character of sedimentation. Deep Sea Res. 6: 1-4
Marine Ecological Surveys Ltd., Faversham, Kent, United Sokolova, M. N. (1972). Trophic structure of deep-sea mac-
K~ngdom robenthos. Mar. Biol. 16: 1-12
North, B. B. (1975). Primary amlnes in California coastal Somero, G. N., Siebenaller, J. F.. Hochachka, P. W (in press).
waters: utilization by phytoplankton. Limnol. Oceanogr Physiological and biochemical adaptations of deep-sea
20: 20-27 animals. In: Rowe. G. T (ed.)T he sea, Vol. 8.Wiley-Inter-
Pearse, J. S., Pearse, V B (1973). Removal of glycine from science, New York
solution by the sea urchin Stronqylocentrotus purpuratus. Southward, A. J., Southward. E. C. (1972a).O bservations on
Mar. Biol. 19: 281-284 the role of dissolved organic compounds in the nutl-ition of
Revsbech, N. P., Sarensen, J.,B lackburn, T H., Lomholt, J. P. b[%nth~Incv ertebrates. 11. Uptake by other animals livlng
(1980). Distribution of oxygen In marine sedirnents mea- in the same habitat as pogonophores, and by some llttoral
sured with niicroelectrodes Llmnol Oceanogr 25: Polychacta Sarsid 48: 61-70
403-4 11 Southward, A. J , Southward, E. C. (197213).O bservations on
Rex, M. A., Van Umersen, C. A., Turner, R D. (1979).R epro- the role of d~ssolvedo rganic compounds in the nutr~tiono f
ductive pattern in the abyssdl snail Benthonella tenella benthlc invertebrates. 111. Uptake in relation to organic
(Jeffreys). In: Stancyk. S. E. (ed.) Reproductive ecology of content of the habitat. Sarsia 50: 29-46
marine invertebrates. University of South Carolina Press, South\vard. A. J.. Southward. E. C. (1980).T he significance of
Columbia, South Carolina, pp. 173-188 dissolved organic compounds in the nutrition of Sibog-
Rhoads, D. C. (1974). Organism-sediment relations on the linum ekmani and other small species of Pogonophora. J.
muddy sea floor. Oceanogr. mar. Biol. A. Rev. 12: 263-300 mar. biol. Ass. U.K. 60: 1005-1034
Rhoads, D. C., Young, D. K. (1970).T he influence of deposit- Spencer. W. K., Wright, C. W. (1966). Asterozoans. In: Moore.
feeding organisms on sediment stability and community R. C. (ed.) Treatise on invertebrate paleontology. Part U,
trophic structure. J. mar Res. 28: 150-178 Echinodermata. 3. Asterozoa-Echinozoa 1: 4-107
Rhoads, D. C., Young, D. K. (1971).A nimal-sediment relations Stephens, G. C. (1975). Uptake of naturally occurring primary
in Cape Cod Bay, Massachusetts. 11. Reworking by Mol- amines by marine annelids. Biol. Bull. mar. biol. Lab.,
padia oolitica (Holothuroldea). Mar Biol. 11: 255-261 Woods Hole 149: 397-407
Sabatini, D. D., Bensch, K ,B arrnett, R. J. (1963).C ytochemis- Stephens, G. C., Volk, M. J., Wright, S. H., Backlund, P. S.
try and electron microscopy. The preservation of cellular (1978). Transep~dermala ccumulation of naturally occur-
structure and enzymatic activity by aldehyde fixation. J. ring anlino acids in the sand dollar, Dendraster excen-
Cell. Biol. 17: 19-58 tricus. Blol. Bull. mar. biol. Lab., Woods Hole 154: 335-347
Sanders, H. L., Hessler, R R., Hampson, G. R. (1965). An Stewart, M. G. (1979). Absorption of dissolved organlc nu-

184 Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser 5: 165-184, 1981
trients by marine invertebrates. Oceanogr mar Biol. A. f~sheso f the North Pacific coast from the Arctic Ocean t~
Rev. 17: 163-192 California. Harriman Alaska Ser. 14. 1-408
Summers, R. G., Hylander, B. L., Colwin, L. H., Colwin, A. L. Whitldtch, R B. (1974). Food-resource partitioning in the
(1975). The functional anatomy of the echinoderm sper- drposit-feeding polychaete Pectinand gouldii. Blol. Bull.
matozoan and its Interaction with the egg at fertilization. mar biol. Lab., Woods Hole 147: 227-235
Am. Zool. 15: 523-551 Wilkinson. G. N. (1961). Statistical estimations in enzyme
Taghon, G. L., Self, R. F. L., Jumars, P. A. (1978). Predicting kinetics. Biochem. J. 80: 324-334
particle selection by deposit feeders: a model and its Winne, D. (1973). Unstirred layer, source of biased Michaelis
implications. Limnol. Oceanogr. 23: 752-759 constant in membrane transport. Bioch~m.b iophys. Acta
Turner, R. L. (1976). Sexual difference in latent period of 298: 27-31
spawning following injection of the hormone l-methy- Wright, S. H (1979). Effect of activity of lateral cilia on
ladenine in Echinaster (Echinodermata: Asteroidea). Gen. transport of amino acids in gills of Mytilus californianus. J.
comp. Endocr 28- 109-112 exp. Zool. 209: 209-220
Turner, R. L., Dearborn, J. H. (1972). Skeletal morphology of Wright, S H., Stephens, G. C. (1978).R emoval of amino acid
the mud star Ctenodiscus crispat~ls (Echinodermata: durlng a single passage of water across the gill of marine
Asteroidea). J. Morphol. 138: 239-262 mussels. J. exp. Zool. 205: 337-351
Verrill, A. E. (1914). Monograph of the shallow-water star-
This paper was presented by Dr A. J. Southward; it was accepted for printing on March 2, 1981

