1 41 9
Aquatic Sciences 5113, 1989 1015-1621189/030235 -14 $ 1.50 + 0.2010
© 1989 Birkhiiuser Verlag, Basel
On the ecology of ciliates in riverwaters: The evaluation of
water quality via ciliates and filamentous bacteria
Fred Stoessel
EAW AG/ETH, UeberlandstraBe 133, CH-8600 Diibendorf
Key words: Ecology; ciliates; river; water quality; sphaerotilus.
ABSTRACT
Since sewage treatment plants are most effective in Switzerland, the micro-benthic communities in receiv-
ing running waters have changed considerably. From January 1980 to September 1981 the periphyton
communities in 13 Swiss streams and rivers were monthly investigated. The NH,-N concentration in these
waters varied between 0.015 and 1.0 mg/I. Four typical communities of microorganisms were found:
In unpolluted running waters mainly small vagile ciliates were abundant; in slightly polluted waters perit-
richa (in the presence of bacteria) were found; in moderatly polluted waters peritricha in combination of
few hymenostomata and Sphaerotilus could grow when bacteria and some degredable organic material
where present; in polluted waters the well-known Spaerotilus-community (after Liebmann) could be
found.
The microscopic as well as the macroscopic aspect should be considered to qualify the degree of pollution
in streams and rivers.
1. Introduction
The 'Allgemeine Gewasserschutzverordnung' prescribes ongoing surveillance of
underground and surface waters (1) and water-quality targets are outlined in article 1
of the 'Verordnung uber Abwassereinleitungen' (18). The statement that confor-
mity with waterquality guidelines be verified is much easier than fulfilling such a
requirement, because fluctuations in the concentrations of dissolved substances, as
well as temporal and local factors, make controls particularly difficult to carry out
(10, 14). Over a two-year period, Jakob (11, 12) removed random samples from a
moderately polluted river at hourly intervals. Within a single day, he detected up to
60-fold variations in the concentration of ammonium-nitrogen and even on average,
concentrations varied by a factor of 8. This problem can be solved by using longer-
term integrated sampling techniques (7). However, this raises the question of how
far the values measured by such techniques, which are obviously suitable for the cal-
culation of pollution burdens, are applicable for the evaluation of the real condition
of rivers and it seems probable that only biological parameters could satisfy such a
requirement. In 1971 Warren (19) commented that properly used, biological indices
can give early warnings. Our conception of the relationship between society and

236
Stoessel
water pollution as well as our knowledge of the responses of communities to environ-
mental change determine the usefulness of such biological indices.
Thanks to the success of a major anti-pollution programme, running waters in Swit-
zerland are presently only slightly polluted. In saprobiological terminology, they
mainly fall in the categories from oligo- to J3-mesosaprobic. There are very few
entirely or partially o.-mesosaprobic rivers and, with the exception of a few heavily
polluted stretches of streams, the polysaprobic category is also largely absent.
As early as 1974/75, we attempted to use ecological criteria in the study of rivers (15).
However, the necessary chemical and biological data bases were inadequate for reli-
able evaluation. Therefore, in order to improve the data base for ecological evalua-
tion, specific long-term observations at 17 sites on selected rivers were undertaken in
1980/81.
This paper deals with the approximate structure of "Aufwuchs" with different kinds
of loadings, but specific species distributions are not emphasized. For the experi-
mental biologist this requires less detailed work than would have been needed if pre-
cise taxonomic distinctions had been made. Nevertheless, the classification of the
water-quality of running waters demands knowledge of both appropriate sampling
methods and about the character and hydrography of the water course under investi-
gation (17).
2. Method
2.1 The Sampling Sites
The 17 sites lie on 16 different rivers and streams throughout Switzerland. Their
geographical position has been described by Frutiger 1985 (9). All sites were visited
at approximately monthly intervals from January 1980 to September 1981. Four of
the sites are not mentioned in this report for the following reasons: three of these are
located on streams formed from glacial melt, which are cloudy during the summer;
the fourth is a very small mountain stream which, in many respects, cannot be com-
pared with the other, larger rivers. In the field studies, both macro-and microinver-
tebrates were examined simultaneously, thus, the sampling sites were spread over
the whole of Switzerland in order to cover diverse zoogeographical regions, even
though protozoa are less affected by geographical location than macroinvertebrates.
2.2 Sampling of ciliate and filamentous bacteria
As in previous investigations (16), the material for the study of protozoan fauna was
taken from growth on stones. The sampling procedure and the quantification of the
sample is extensively described by Stossel 1986 (17). Microscopic examination was
performed on site immediately after sampling, to avoid changes resulting from lack
of food, predation, oxygen loss or temperature changes in the sampling vessels. The
presence of macroscopically visible peritricha colonies and the abundance of
Spaerotilus natans were record.

Ciliates in riverwaters 237
The peritrichous ciliates were recorded under the following categories:
a) no visible colonies
b) colonies discernible as fine traces
c) colonies present as thick, readily visible films.
Table 1. Assessment criteria for Sphaerotilus abundance. Since growth is strongly influenced by high
water levels, only results from samples taken at least 14 days after the last "high water" were included in
this study, thus ensuring that all growth had occurred in the absence of mechanical disturbance.
Description
0 no Sphaerotilus visible, even microscopically, in samples of growth on stones.
1 isolated bacterial strands in microscopic preparation
2 a small number of bacterial strands in microscopic preparation
3 frequent Sphaerotilus strands in microscopic preparation
4 numerous Sphaerotilus strands in microscopic preparation, Sphaerotilus also visi-
ble beneath stones with naked eye
5 Sphaerotilus visible macroscopically in large quantities
2.3 Chemical Reference Parameters
In order to characterize the local conditions, chemical parameters were measured in
random water samples. However, few of these parameters exert any direct influence
on ciliates, therefore, they will be referred to as reference parameters. A sample was
taken at the beginning and the end of each biological sampling period, and trans-
ported to the laboratory in isolated vessels. From the more than thirty measured
parameters, ammonium-nitrogen and total-phosphorus were selected for this
report. The measured values are depicted in figures 1aand1 b. Although the study
deliberately included heavily polluted rivers, the variation of the median values is
very small. Therefore, since the values of the individual concentrations (particularly
NH -N) were very scattered and their distribution rarely fitted any of the common
4
distribution functions, the median values were used for further analysis.
3. Results
3.1 The dependence of peritrichous ciliate incidence on chemical pollution
Data evaluation is based on the classifications given in the 'Empfehlungen iiber die
Untersuchung der schweizerischen Oberfliichengewiisser' (7), which defines pollu-
tion classes from unpolluted to heavily polluted for a number of parameters. In
figures 2 a to 2 c, the mean value of the total-phosphorous in the filtrate is plotted
against the number of peritrichous ciliate species present. To take into account poss-
ible seasonal variations in conditions, the results from summer (1st April to 31st
October) and winter are presented separately in figures 2 a and 2 b. With two excep-
tions in both half years, the number of species increases with increasing phosphorus
pollution. The first exception, the Biinz (BU), is a small river in the Alpine foothills,
heavily polluted by the effluent from villages and a large abattoir (Qmean ca. 2 m3/s ).

238
Stoessel
3
Phosphor im Filtrat
1c3
6
3
1if
6
3
101
6
3
100
6
3
( ~ I : I:" l lJ )l l) ct : N::o J : cc3 . c.:: , : c~ ..:, ( I ( ( II-.I I ." l ll,I Il ll) ~ :(I I3 ;Il l: -l l: 0:= ( :' J )I :( C ( C: I/ JD DI) '.t 0 < C. Do, cC< : 0 C: cD DJ ( c N C/ : D ) C:.( 0 :. DJ/ , ) c ! N.m 2c., . .
( '
I
(II CD
(') Ill
Ill
}i:
winter values
'• maximum values
••.• medium values
, minimum values etc.
summer values
Figure 1 a. Maximum and minimum values in mg/I of the reference parameter total-phosphorus in the
filtrate and NH-N. Average number of values per sampling site used for the calculations: in winter 12
4
(Biinz 8), and in summer 24 (Biinz 11).
In the Biinz, the peritrichous diversity was small throughout the period of the investi-
gation. The Cassarate (CA), the second exception, is also heavily polluted with
untreated water at the sampling site. The peritrichous diversity during the summer
was twice that of the winter period. This may be caused by the often much higher
flow rate in summer (16); the consequent dilution of the untreated effluent allowing
a greater species diversity. Without this large dilution, the concentration of sewage
water would increase significantly over the summer period, because of the large
increase in the number of visitors to the near-by holiday resorts. In the Ergolz (ER),
the problem is different: here during the summer, up to 17 different species of peri-

Ciliates in riverwaters 239
6
4 NH4-N
I
2
10°
~
7
5 ~t f~
3 ~~
.·.i::·::.:.:.i :
2
I
:.I i
10-1
I
7 ~ I I ~1:
5 I I
t~ I
3 I .
2 ~ I
I .
10-2 ~;~{
7
5
0 I i : ( I:l i ' l)I l li 0C N:: D I Ic~ . C.:. c.~ .:. 0 I I I ~ I-l ll ll l l l i :I;I ei l: ;l . ll ·: ·. 0:(: :': ) II ( IC C:: l/ D DI l) <C. 0 C. DD. I< C 0: CC:D D I ( c N C/ : D ) C:0.( . : D/ . I) I.m 2 NC.. .
Ill
(') CD Ill
Ill
Figure lb. Maximum and minimum values in mg/I of the reference parameter NH-N. For further infor-
4
mation see figure la.
trichous ciliates were found simultaneously. The median concentrations of the
chemical reference parameters, however, remained close to their winter levels, even
though the volume of effluent approximately halved during the summer period: with
the exception of NH -N (figure 1 a) whose concentration sank to a median of a little
4
over 1 mg/I.
If the total-phosphorus values over the whole sampling period are plotted against the
maximum number of species detected, then here too a reduction in diversity above
300mg/l phosphorus is apparent. Although no correlation is evident in figure 3,
trends present in figures 2 a and 2 c are confirmed. Again, the Cassarate and the
Biinz are on the right hand side, suggesting less diversity than the level of pollution
would imply. According to the guidelines laid down in the 'Empfehlungen iiber die
Untersuchung schweizerischer Oberflachengewasser' (7), the overall range of val-
ues for total phosphorus in the filtrate and ammonium-nitrogen for both these rivers
imply that they would fall into the 'heavily polluted' category.

240
Stoessel
PERITRICHA PERITRICHA
r 20-r~~~~~~~~~~..J....~~~~....uc__,_
I
.••
12 18
EA•/
/•u ... •""
12
II . .., .
··. /·
/
" • lrIH
SE~
,......../•so
---·-·---------·
10I ' 2 ' 4 56789 11 0 ' 2 ' 4 56769 '"1 2 ' 4 56789 to1 ' ~1 2 3 4 5678 ~ t 2 3 4 5678 ~ 1 2 3 4 5678 ~ 1
P FILTA. P FILTR.
,., ,.,
Curve Curve
'l'•A.+(BllX) 1.63393 .512831£-1 .901864 1.59724 .375087 .960174
PERITRICHA
1 2 3456781 2 3456781 2 3456781
~ ~ ~ ~
P FILTR.
,.,
Curve
1,38873 . 434977 ,9"44266
Figures 2 a-c. Maximum number of species detected aginst the median values of the reference parameter
phosphorus in the filtrate. 2 a, summer; 2 b, winter; 2 c, Jan. 80 - Sept. 81. The following were not
included in the correlation calculation: in 2 a, ER and BU; in 2 b, CA and BU; and in 2 c, BU. In these and
the following figures, the rivers' names are abbreviated to their first two letters (except for the Calancasca
= CA). For the unabbreviated forms, see figures 1 a and b. Figure 3: NH4-N concentration against the
number of peritrichous species.

Ciliates in riverwaters 241
PERITRICHA
16
ve l!I l!lsu
,••
0 TH
101 - 2 4 5 B 7 89 1 01 - 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 B 9
Figure 3. NH-N concentration against the number of peritrichous species.
4
3.2 The dependence of peritrichous ciliate abundance on chemical pollution
Although precise sampling and quantification of peritrichous ciliates is not possible
and the concentrations of chemicals in any single biological sample are coincidental,
certain trends are apparent. Figures 4 a and 4 b present the peritrichous ciliate fre-
quency in the context of the median values of the pollutant parameters totalphos-
phorus in the filtrate and ammonium-nitrogen. Both the number of different species
and their frequency rise with increasing pollution, only to fall again at high concent-
rations. (This was first established in a microscopic study of growth at 380 sites dur-
ing the years 1974175 (Stossel, unpublished). The macroscopic detection limit for
peritrichous strands is a density of ca. 500 individuals per 20 microscope fields of
view at lOOx magnification. Above 1500 individuals, the peritrichous colonies gener-
ally appear as thick, fur-like »cushions': Within this category, further division into
thinner colonies and very dense and thick fur-like colonies is possible. On the whole,
in the Maglisina (MA), Venoge (VE) and Murg (MU), no thick peritrichous growth
was present, whereas, in the Ergolz (ER), Braye (BR), and above all the Cassarate
(CA), dense peritrichous ciliate populations were visible: at this last site, the
colonies were predominantly thick and fur-like. In figure 4 a, the Sarne (SO) lies
outside the main scatter of points. This stream, in Jura canton, goes underground
for a few kilometers before re-emerging a short distance above the sampling
site. Apart from the neighbouring woods and a few fields, there are no significant
food sources for bacterivorous filter feeders in this reach of the stream. The am-
monium-nitrogen burden in particular is very low (see figure 1 a): the occasional
somewhat elevated values could come from the rather small area of agricultural
land.

242 Stoessel
PERITRICHA PERITAICHA
... "•. 'c• ... ... .. . ... c•
10' ,, "'
"
. .
'" '" ·'"
10' " !!i' n' '"
... ...
'" BU
10' 101 -:
.
•o "•o
'"' '"' ~
"cc "cc
. .
10·1 ... 10-1
'"' ' 2 345678 11 0 ' 2 3 "5678 ' "1 ' 2 3 4 !1678 1 10' · 2 ' 5 6 7 89 11 0· 1 ' 5 s 1a9 1 0t '
P FILTR. NH4-H
Figures 4 a and 4 b: peritrichous ciliate frequency plotted against the median values of a) totalphosphorus
in the filtrate, and b) the NH-N concentration.
4
The horizontal line in the uppermost third of the diagrams corresponds to the macroscopic detection limit
mentioned in the text. The colonies from the sampling sites lying above this line were generally visible to
the naked eye.
HYMENOSTOMATA
...
...
,,. '"
cc.
•"
" .,, •"
"•o
"•u
'"
3 4 5 6 7 89
Figure 5: Hymenostomous ciliate frequency against the NH 4-N concentration. The straight line drawn by
hand is not a correlation curve, but serves to clarify comments in the made text.
3.3 Relationship between hymenostomous ciliates and chemical pollution
Figure 5 shows that the hymnestomous ciliate frequency increases with increasing
ammonium-nitrogen concentration, although four exceptions should be mentioned:
over a large portion of their courses, the Murg (MU) and Ergolz (ER) flow through

Ciliates in riverwaters 243
PEAITAICHA HYMENOSTOMATA
'CA
10'
1o'
10' 'su
... ..
90 "
10'
10-I
10I -l 5 6 7 es 1 01 ' 3 4 5 6 3 4 5 6 7 B 9 1 01 " ' ' 5
SPHAEROTILUS
,.,
Curve
2.20403 .843807
Figures 6 a and 6 b: Plots of the Sphaerotilus abundance against a) the peritrichous ciliate frequency and b)
the hymenostomous ciliate frequency. The Biinz (BU) was not included in the calculation of the regres-
sion function for fig. 6 a.
agricultural land, and receive a relatively high input of treated sewage water, which
explains their, in a Swiss context, above average ammonium-nitrogen content. How-
ever, since their biodegradable organic content is low, bacteria production is low.
Thus, hymenostomic ciliate growth is limited, since as vagile filter feeders they rely on
a high density of growing bacteria (see section 3.4). Similar conditions apply to the
Thur (TH) and Venoge (VE), but the flow rate of the Thur is approximately twice
that of the Murg, and because of the low population density of its drainage area, the
Venoge has a lower sewage input than the Ergolz.
3.4 Ciliate frequency and Sphaerotilus growth
The dependence of Sphaerotilus natans growth on the amount of organic material
available in the water has often been described, and is uncontested (3, 4, 5, 14). It is
less clear, however, whether there is a relationship between peritrichous ciliate fre-
quency and Sphaerotilus. Since there is a relationship between organic pollution and
peritrichous ciliate frequency (see section 3.2), it is to be expected that this parallel
dependence would manifest itself as a regression. Indeed, in figure 6 a there is good
agreement between Sphaerotilus abundance and peritricha frequency. With the
exception of the Biinz, the logarithmic pairs of values fit a linear regression (r2 =
0.844). The exceptional case of the heavily polluted Biinz will not be discussed
further in this paper, however, a possible explanation follows for the three most mar-
kedly deviating rivers the Murg, Ergolz and Cassarate: in the cases of the Murg and

244
Stoessel
Ergolz, the only inputs upstream of the sampling point are treated sewage and
agricultural run-off. Bacterial drift is sufficient to support dense peritrichous growth,
although the substrate concentration is inadequate for a large Sphaerotilus popula-
tion. Upstream of the sampling point, the Cassarate receives a considerable input of
untreated domestic sewage, containing both adequate substrate for Sphaerotilus and
free bacteria for peritrichous ciliates, thus leading to the highest peritrichous density
of all the sampling sites. Figure 6 b supports the contention that the higher hymnes-
tomous ciliate frequencies require the presence of sufficient quantities of growing
bacteria, and a dependence is only apparent where the pollution-burden is high.
3.5 The effect of increasing pollution on the relative abundance ofp eritrichous and
hymenostomous ciliates
We have shown above that at low hymenostomous ciliate frequencies ( <20) there is
no correlation between frequency and organic pollution, the scatter covering almost
the whole of the pollutant-burden range. This is less true for peritrichous ciliates,
although frequency drops off at very high pollution levels. Figure 7 presents the
peritrichous ciliate frequencies in ascending order, with the exception of the heavily
polluted Biinz whose values are at the right hand side, as a histogram, with the fre-
quency and abundance respectively of Hymenostoma and Sphaerotilus super-
posed.
The peritrichous ciliate frequency does not correlate perfectly with the concentra-
tions of degradable organic material as represented by the Sphaerotilus abundance.
This is clear in the cases of the Ergolz and the Murg (fig. 6 a), where the peritrichous
ciliates are abundant, whilst hymenostomous ciliate are not. This may be a consequ-
ence of the elevated bacteria density but low concentrations of degradable organic
material. The Venoge presents a similar picture. Certainly, it should be borne in
mind that long self-cleaning stretches to sewage treatment plants have similar
effects. The peritrichous fauna of the Biinz is completely different: the low fre-
quency detected is most probably the result of competition for living space between
Sphaerotilus natans and the peritricha, predominantly Carchesium polypinum. The
rapid growth of the sewage bacteria, which stifle all competition, and whose tufts
are kept short by the current, leaves little space in which peritricha can grow. The
very low peritrichous density (figs. 4 a, b, 6 a and 7) is, at the most, analogous
to that of the rivers whose organic pollution is low. The overall Ciliate community
corresponds reasonably closely to the Sphaerotilus community described by Lieb-
mann (13).
The histograms for hymenostomous ciliates and Sphaerotilus show a clear similarity.
Sphaerotilus is capable ofrapid growth because of its rapid metabolism, though only
in the presence of sufficient degradable organic pollution: thus, it is most dense in the
immediate vicinity of a pollutant source. At high frequencies, hymenostomous
ciliates show a positive correlation with pollutant parameters (fig. 5). Hence, at
higher pollution levels, predictions may be based on Hymenostomata and
Sphaerotilus frequencies combined.
A number of pollution categories may be derived from figure 7. Thus, the results for

Ciliates in riverwaters 245
6,-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Cl)
::::> 5
_J
4
b
a: 3
w
<( 2
::c
a...
1
Cl)
0
400,-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~
~ 300
0
I-
C/) 200
0
z
w 100
:::?
>-
::c
<(
::c
0
a: 1 00
t-
a:
w
a... 50
mn mn mn
m
0 (tJ .<..I.>.
en c:
·u; .m...
(tJ
<I>
(«(c0 t ;: J C. 0c< . JI . :> . C<ceQ ln >: )) i0 0c : I.s:. ::. -::. :. J .. C:N< :I l> ::. :0 :. ::. J. ~c00 : C :m( ::t ?J i C.> 0Q . D. .) - 0 w.0N .. . (m( eet )nnJ C::N c D>:
I : J ::
) ) = ) ?
Figure 7. Histograms of the peritrichous and hymenostomous ciliate frequencies, and the Sphaerotilus
abundance.

246
Stoessel
the Calancasca, Some, Sense, Ticino, Thur and Suze point to low organic pollution,
whereas those for the Murg, Venoge and Ergolz through the bacteria, reveal signific-
ant pollution. Whether the bacteria originated in sewage works or proliferated dur-
ing the self-cleaning process, is of no importance in this context. The incidence of
hymenostomous ciliates and Sphaerotilus in both these categories is low. A non-neg-
ligible level of degradable organic pollution was present in the Magliasina, Broye
and Cassarate, and the bacterial burden was sufficient to support a high density of
Peritricha. The Biinz exemplified another pollution-burden category. characterized
by an enourmous reduction in the peritrichous density compared to the Cassarate:
though additional sampling at suitable, less-polluted sites or sites on longer self-
cleaning stretches might yield different results. In the third pollution-burden categ-
ory, hymnenostomous ciliates are present at more frequent, reaching high densities
in the Cassarate: the trend of the Sphaerotilus abundance is also clearly upward. In
the final pollution-burden category, represented here by the Bilnz, both the
hymenostomous ciliates and Sphaerotilus levels are very high. The pollution com-
munities here emphasized, naturally do not correspond to any rigid ecological
boundary entities, but rather to fluid boundaries.
4. Application of the Results: Discussion
Figure 7 shows that, in the presence of diverse groups of pollutants, the microorgan-
isms form typical communities, which can readily be differentiated. Four types of
pollution predominated in the rivers studied: the respective pollution communities
are summarized in table 2 and described more fully below.
The first community corresponds to the group of unpolluted and negligibly polluted
rivers. Neither ciliates nor Sphaerotilus natans dominate, and never exceed low fre-
quencies. Ciliate communities consist mainly of small, barely visible vagile forms.
The second community, which could be defined as the 'Peritrichous group' is distin-
guished by a peritrichous population with several species, the aggregates ranging in
size from macroscopically invisible to readily visible. The hymenostomous ciliates
are somewhat more abundant than in the first category, yet the vagile forms are very
infrequent, if present at all. Sphaerotilus natans is microscopically generally readily
detected, however, macroscopically at best visible as very small, individual tufts
beneath stones (8). Rivers showing such an incidence of Sphaerotilus mainly carry
treated effluent, or the sampling site lies on a stretch featuring efficient self-cleaning.
Above all, sewage treatment plants with inadequate retention of bacterial
aggregates, or which release sludge from the secondary clarifier can give rise to this
community in the receiving rivers.
The third group is characterized by an elevated abundance of Sphaerotilus natans
and hymenostomous ciliates, as a consequence of higher concentrations of degrad-
able organic material. Under these conditions, Sphaerotilus may also be present on
the upper, light-facing side of stones. Peritrichous ciliates too, may reach high fre-
quencies, appearing as fine, but dense, fur-like coatings.
Characterized of the fourth group is a sudden decrase in the peritricha frequency,
although the conditions remain optimal for the growth of Sphaerotilus natans. The

Ciliates in riverwaters 247
hymenostomous ciliates also attained their maximum abundance, including the larger
forms Paramecium sp. and Colpidium sp., which were found at high frequencies.
It should be mentioned that the only heavily polluted sampling site, where anaerobic
conditions extended over the whole breadth of the river leading to the formation of
iron sulphide and the covering of the river bed in black mud, proved to be an excep-
tion. Even in the third pollution category, such iron sulphide formation could only be
detected in small, isolated areas under stones.
One consequence of the fact that 81 % of the Swiss population are served by sewage
treatment plants (as of 1.1. 83, Lit. (2)), is that currently the vast majority of Swiss
rivers and streams fall into the society categories 1 and 2, and the Sphaerotilus com-
munities are in continual decline. The decrease in organic pollution resulting from
the measures taken to protect rivers could lead one to the conclusion that bacteria
from effluent and ciliates are not well-suited to the description of lightly- and neg-
ligibly-polluted rivers. This certainly not the case, since biological assessment of
rivers relies on sensitive, quickly-reacting organisms. Indeed, they are all the
more necessary since investigations of macroinvertebrate societies have shown
that, in the least polluted categories, macroinvertebrate community are far more
susceptible to hydrographic parameters than to the bacteria and degradable
organic material carried in the water. In such situations, ciliates and Sphaerotilus
natans allow a prediction to be made, since they are less influenced by hydro-
graphic conditions. Thus, for example, the same ciliates are present in both swift-
and slow-flowing rivers, but in the former simply less abundant at any particular
pollution level.
REFERENCES
1 Allgemeine Gewasserschutzverordnung vom 19. Juni 1972 (Stand am 1. Juli 1981). Syst. Sammlung
des Bundesrechtes, Ziff. 814.201.
2 Bundesamt fiir Umweltschutz Gewasserschutzstatistik. Schriftenreihe Umweltschutz, Nr. 46 (1985).
3 Eichenberger, E., 1967, Okologische Untersuchungen an ModellflieBgewassern: I. Die jahreszeit-
liche Verteilung der bestandesbildenden pflanzlichen Organismen bei verschiedener Abwasserbelas-
tung. Schweiz. Z. Hydro!. 29: 1-31.
4 Eichenberger, E., 1967, Okologische Untersuchungen an ModellflieBgewassern: II. Jahreszeitliche
Veranderungen der Biomassebildung bei verschiedenen Abwasserbelastungen. Schweiz. Z. Hydro!.
29: 32-52.
5 Eichenberger, E., 1972, Okologische Untersuchungen an ModellflieBgewassern: III. Die jahreszeit-
lichen Veranderungen im Verhaltnis von heterotropher zu phototropher Biomasse bei verschiedenen
Abwasserbelastungen. Schweiz. Z. Hydro!. 34: 155-172.
6 Eichenberger, E., 1972, Okologische Untersuchungen an ModellflieBgewassern: IV. Auswirkungen
der Selbstreinigung auf die Biomassebildung in einem Abwassergradienten. Schweiz. Z. Hydro!. 34:
173-189.
7 Eidgenossisches Departement des Innern, 1982, Empfehlungen iiber die Untersuchung der
schweizerischen Oberflachengewiisser.
8 Favre, J ., 1975, Inhibition de la lumiere visible et UV-proche a forte intensite. Dissertation ETH
Nr.5411.
9 Frutiger, A., 1985, The production quotient PQ: A new approach for quality determination of slightly
to moderately polluted running waters. Arch. Hydrobiol. 104: 513-526.
10 Giittinger, H., 1982, Zusammenhiinge zwischen physikalischen und chemischen Faktoren und Ma-
kroinvertebraten in FlieBgewiissern. Dissertation ETH Nr. 6952.

248 Stoessel
11 Jakob A., 1983, Tagesperiodik ausgewahlter chemischer und physikalischer Parameter in einem
FlieBgewasser (La Suze, Vallon St. Imier). Lizentiatsarbeit Zoo!. Inst. Univ. Bern.
12 Jakob, A. und Tschumi, P.-A., 1988, Tagesschwankungen chemischer und physikalischer Faktoren in
einem FlieBgewasser (Schiiss, Berner Jura). Arch. Hydrobiol. 113: 607-620.
13 Liebmann, H., 1951, Handbuch der Frischwasser-und Abwasserbiologie. R. Oldenbourg, Miinchen,
539p.
14 Meier, W., 1980, Untersuchungen iiber die biologische Wirkung periodischer Belastungsschwank·
ungen in FlieBgewi.issern. Dissertation ETH Nr. 6546.
15 Perret, P., 1977, Zustand der schweizerischen FlieBgewi.isser in den Jahren 1974175. Eidgenossisches
Amt fiir Umweltschutz.
16 Stossel, F., 1979, Autokologische Analyse der in schweizerischen FlieBgewi.issern haufig vorkommen-
den Ciliatenarten und ihre Eignung als Bioindikatoren. Schweiz. Z. Hydrobiol. 41: 113-140.
17 Stossel, F., 1987, Effect of the coefficients of discharge on ciliate populations of a running water con-
taminated by municipal wastewater. Arch. f. Hydrobiol. 108: 483-497.
18 Verordnung iiber Abwassereinleitungen vom 8.12. 1975 (Stand am 1. Oktober 1980). Syst. Samm-
lung des Bundesrecht, Ziff. 814.225.21, Bern.
19 Warren, C. E., 1971, Biology and Water Pollution Control. W. B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia,
London, Toronto, 434 p.
Received 23 August 1988;
accepted 17 January 1989.

